# calcium-dobesilate-nbk
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK71196/
Bytes html: 47295


Calcium dobesilate for chronic venous insufficiency: a systematic review - Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews - NCBI Bookshelf 

Warning: The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more... 

An official website of the United States government 
Here's how you know 
The .gov means it's official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site. 

The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. 
Log in Show account info Close Account Logged in as: username 
Dashboard 

Publications 

Account settings 

Log out 
Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation 
Bookshelf 

Search database Books All Databases Assembly Biocollections BioProject BioSample Books ClinVar Conserved Domains dbGaP dbVar Gene Genome GEO DataSets GEO Profiles GTR Identical Protein Groups MedGen MeSH NLM Catalog Nucleotide OMIM PMC Protein Protein Clusters Protein Family Models PubChem BioAssay PubChem Compound PubChem Substance PubMed SNP SRA Structure Taxonomy ToolKit ToolKitAll ToolKitBookgh Search term Search 
Browse Titles 

Advanced 

Help 

Disclaimer 

NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health. 

Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews [Internet]. York (UK): Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (UK); 1995-. 

Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews [Internet]. 
Show details York (UK): Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (UK) ; 1995-. Search term 
Calcium dobesilate for chronic venous insufficiency: a systematic review 

Review published: 2004 . 

Bibliographic details: Ciapponi A, Laffaire E, Roque M. Calcium dobesilate for chronic venous insufficiency: a systematic review. Angiology 2004; 55(2): 147-154. [ PubMed : 15026869 ] 

Abstract 

Chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) causes much discomfort and sick leave. Many randomized clinical trials (RCTs) have shown a beneficial effect of calcium dobesilate, but consensus is lacking about efficacy and safety. The authors report a meta-analysis of the effectiveness and safety of calcium dobesilate in CVI. Ten RCTs (778 patients) in which calcium dobesilate for CVI was compared with placebo met the inclusion criteria. Only 3 trials (608 patients) were of good methodological quality. Calcium dobesilate significantly improved night cramps and discomfort nearly twice as well as placebo, with the number needed to treat (NNT) being 8 (95% CI 4-50) and 4 (95% CI 3-7), respectively. Frequency of adverse events was not significantly different from placebo. Subgroup analysis found a differential response with respect to disease severity, with greater improvements in pain, heaviness, and malleolar swelling being seen in the severe group than in the mild group. Calcium dobesilate improved paresthesias significantly more than placebo in the severe but not in the mild group and the effect on leg volume was also significantly better in the severe group (-7.2% vs -1.6%). No difference in effect was found for different doses of calcium dobesilate (1,000 or 1,500 mg/day). Sensitivity analyses did not affect the results. Current evidence suggests that calcium dobesilate is more effective than placebo in improving some CVI symptoms, that there is higher efficacy in more severe disease, and that a dose of 1,000 mg/day is as effective and safe as 1,500 mg/day. Further adequately powered trials are needed to further evaluate these hypotheses. 
Copyright © 2014 University of York. Bookshelf ID: NBK71196 Share 
Views 

PubReader 

Print View 

Cite this Page Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews [Internet]. York (UK): Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (UK); 1995-. Calcium dobesilate for chronic venous insufficiency: a systematic review. 2004. 

Similar articles in PubMed 

Phlebotonics for venous insufficiency. [Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016] Phlebotonics for venous insufficiency. Martinez-Zapata MJ, Vernooij RW, Uriona Tuma SM, Stein AT, Moreno RM, Vargas E, Capellà D, Bonfill Cosp X. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Apr 6; 4(4):CD003229. Epub 2016 Apr 6. 

Phlebotonics for venous insufficiency. [Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020] Phlebotonics for venous insufficiency. Martinez-Zapata MJ, Vernooij RW, Simancas-Racines D, Uriona Tuma SM, Stein AT, Moreno Carriles RMM, Vargas E, Bonfill Cosp X. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Nov 3; 11(11):CD003229. Epub 2020 Nov 3. 

Clinical evaluation of the efficacy and safety of calcium dobesilate in patients with chronic venous insufficiency of the lower limbs. [Angiology. 2002] Clinical evaluation of the efficacy and safety of calcium dobesilate in patients with chronic venous insufficiency of the lower limbs. Arceo A, Berber A, Treviño C. Angiology. 2002 Sep-Oct; 53(5):539-44. 

A randomized, double-blind multicentre clinical trial comparing the efficacy of calcium dobesilate with placebo in the treatment of chronic venous disease. [Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008] A randomized, double-blind multicentre clinical trial comparing the efficacy of calcium dobesilate with placebo in the treatment of chronic venous disease. Martínez-Zapata MJ, Moreno RM, Gich I, Urrútia G, Bonfill X, Chronic Venous Insufficiency Study Group. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008 Mar; 35(3):358-65. Epub 2007 Oct 25. 

Phlebotonics for venous insufficiency. [Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005] Phlebotonics for venous insufficiency. Martinez MJ, Bonfill X, Moreno RM, Vargas E, Capellà D. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Jul 20; (3):CD003229. Epub 2005 Jul 20. 
See reviews... See all... 
Recent Activity 
Clear Turn Off Turn On 
Calcium dobesilate for chronic venous insufficiency: a systematic review - Datab... Calcium dobesilate for chronic venous insufficiency: a systematic review - Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews 

Your browsing activity is empty. 

Activity recording is turned off. 

Turn recording back on 
See more... Follow NCBI 
Twitter 

Facebook 

LinkedIn 

GitHub 

NCBI Insights Blog 

Connect with NLM 

Twitter 

Facebook 

Youtube 

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 

Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure 

Help Accessibility Careers 

