Medicines | European Medicines Agency (EMA) Skip to main content English Select your language български español čeština dansk Deutsch eesti ελληνικά English français Gaeilge hrvatski italiano latviešu lietuvių magyar Malti Nederlands polski português română slovenčina slovenščina suomi svenska Search Select how you want to search using keywords All words Any word Exact phrase Medicines Find medicine Therapeutic areas: latest updates Download medicine data What we publish on medicines and when Medicines under evaluation National registers Human regulatory Overview Research and development Marketing authorisation Post-authorisation Medical devices Herbal products Veterinary regulatory Overview Research and development Marketing authorisation Post-authorisation Committees Overview How the committees work CHMP CVMP PRAC COMP HMPC CAT PDCO Working parties and other groups News & events Overview News Events What's new Committee highlights Publications Press and social media Podcast: Inside EMA EMA Campaigns Speeches Open consultations RSS feeds Partners & networks Overview EU partners International activities Patients and consumers Healthcare professionals Academia Pharmaceutical industry Networks Health technology assessment bodies One Health approach Animal health practitioners One substance - one assessment About us Overview What we do Who we are How we work Fees Support to SMEs Annual reports and work programmes History of EMA Careers Procurement About this website Data protection and privacy Contacts Home Medicines Medicines To see this form, go to your browser settings and allow our website to use JavaScript. Select type of medicine Filter options Medicines for human use Medicines for veterinary use Herbal products All Search by name or active substance Search by name or active substance Search by name or active substance Search by name or active substance Our Medicine finder above helps you find information on medicines authorised for human or veterinary use. You can find these by including the medicine's name or its active substance. It shows you information on centrally authorised medicines - medicines that EMA evaluated. You can also find information on herbal medicines. Advanced search Use our advanced search to make use of search filters that are designed to make your search more precise and for finding information on all types of medicine-related procedures, including refused or withdrawn medicines. We also offer search tips to help optimise your search experience. Go to advanced search Not able to find the medicine you are looking for? Nationally authorised medicines The medicine you are looking for may be authorised in individual Member States via national procedures , rather than centrally via EMA. Only medicines evaluated by EMA are available on this website. You may not be able to obtain a complete list of available treatment options for a specific condition by searching on EMA's website. Check the national registers of authorised medicines for finding medicines authorised via national procedures. Check national registers EMA's role The European Medicines Agency (EMA) facilitates development and access to medicines for countries within the European Union (EU). EMA evaluates applications for marketing authorisation submitted via the centralised procedure, monitors the safety of medicines across their lifecycle and provides information to healthcare professionals and patients. The medicines included in our work include medicines for human use, medicines for veterinary use and herbal medicines. Read more about what we do In this section Download medicine data You can dowload EMA's medicine-related data published on this website in Excel table format What we publish on medicines and when The different types of information stakeholders can expect on this website about medicines, including the publication times and location Medicines for human use under evaluation The list of medicines currently under evaluation by EMA’s human medicines committee (CHMP), updated monthly National registers of authorised medicines A list of national medicine registers in the different Member States of EU / EEA, containing information on medicines authorised in those countries Therapeutic areas: latest updates HIV and AIDS Latest news and updates from EMA on medicines against HIV and AIDS Cancer Latest news and updates from EMA on medicines against cancer Cardiovascular disease Latest news and updates from EMA on medicines against cardiovascular disease Diabetes Latest news and updates from EMA on medicines against diabetes Immune-system diseases Latest news and updates from EMA on medicines against immune-system diseases Viral diseases Latest news and updates from EMA on medicines against viral diseases Neurodegenerative diseases Latest news and updates from EMA on medicines against neurodegenerative diseases Buying medicines online To stay safe when buying human or veterinary medicines online, buy only from online retailers registered with the national competent authorities in the EU Member States. The EU has introduced a logo to help you identify these retailers. This will help reduce your risk of buying sub-standard or falsified medicines. See logo for human medicines See logo for veterinary medicines Featured topics Medicine shortages Information on medicine shortages that EMA has assessed and links to national registers of shortages in the EU / EEA Antimicrobial resistance What EMA does to combat antimicrobial resistance Biosimilar medicines The regulation of biosimilar medicines in the EU, including information guides for patients and healthcare professionals Crisis preparedness and management EMA's role in preparing for and managing crisis situations affecting the EU single market for medicines and medical devices COVID-19 medicines Information on the authorised COVID-19 treatments and vaccines in the EU Suspected side effects of medicines Check the European suspected adverse drug reactions database for reports of suspected side effects and information on how to interpret them Check adverse drug reactions database Veterinary Medicines information website Visit the Veterinary Medicines informattion website for information on authorised veterinary medicines across all EU / EEA countries, including their availability in specific countries. Visit veterinary medicines website Services and databases EMA has several websites and systems to support its work. Some of the information in these systems is available to all visitors, such as details about clinical trials in the EU, reports of suspected side effects, and other medicine-related data. Browse services and databases Medicine evaluation figures EMA publishes information on the volume and outcome of marketing authorisation and post-authorisation applications for the human and veterinary medicines that it evaluates. Check evaluation figures Share this page Back to top Product emergency hotline OUTSIDE WORKING HOURS About us What we do Careers Committees & working parties Regulatory network European experts About this website Languages Accessibility Glossaries Cookies Website data protection notice Data protection at EMA Frequently asked questions Search tips Access to documents Contacts Send a question EMA Service Desk (system support) Services and databases European Medicines Agency Domenico Scarlattilaan 6 1083 HS Amsterdam The Netherlands Tel: +31 (0)88 781 6000 How to find us Postal address and deliveries Business hours and holidays RSS Feed Bluesky Follow EMA on Bluesky. Opens in a new window. YouTube Follow EMA on YouTube. Opens in a new window. LinkedIn Follow EMA on LinkedIn. Opens in a new window. © 1995 - 2026 European Medicines Agency European Union agencies network An agency of the European Union