ICTRP Search Portal Home Advanced Search List By Search Tips UTN ICTRP website Contact us List By Health Topics List By Countries List By Regions/Countries UTN request UTN validation In English In French In Spanish In Arabic In Chinese In Russian Terms and Conditions for Use of WHO ICTRP Data 1. Introduction The following Terms and Conditions apply for use of the WHO ICTRP data. Downloading the WHO ICTRP data indicates your acceptance of the following Terms and Conditions. These Terms and Conditions apply to all data obtained from the WHO ICTRP , independent of format and method of acquisition. 2. WHO ICTRP Database The World Health Organization, through its International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, has developed the ICTRP database to provide patients, family members and members of the public current information about clinical research studies. The ICTRP database contains information about clinical trials being conducted throughout the world. This data is provided to the ICTRP by registries conforming to WHO standards. ICTRP is updated weekly. Trial data posted on this search portal are not endorsed by WHO, but are provided as a service to our users. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for any damages arising from the use of the data in the ICTRP database. None of the information obtained through use of the search portal should in any way be used in clinical care without consulting a physician or licensed health professional. WHO is not responsible for the accuracy, completeness and/or use made of the content displayed for any trial record. 3. Availability ICTRP data are publicly available to all requesters, at no charge. 4. Use of ICTRP Data a. Neither the WHO ICTRP, nor any of its data providers, make any warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to data contained in the database, and, furthermore, assume no liability for any party's use, or the results of such use, of any part of the database. b. In any publication or distribution of these data (1) you should, to the extent possible and appropriate, attribute the source of the data as WHO ICTRP; (2) you should update the data such that they are current at all times; (3) you should clearly display the date the data were processed by WHO ICTRP; c. You shall not assert any proprietary rights to any portion of the ICTRP database. d. You shall not use information extracted from the ICTRP database for marketing, promotional or commercial purposes. e. You shall not use the name or emblem of WHO in association with the use of data from the ICTRP database. These terms and conditions are in effect as long as the user retains any of the data obtained from the WHO ICTRP database . No results were found for: lipedema Trials are sometimes recorded in more than one registry. These records can refer to each other using the 'Secondary ID' field. The search portal uses these Secondary IDs to group records about the same trial together in the search results. Each group of records referring to a trial is displayed in table that is seen by pressing the + symbol. The record with the earliest date of registration is always shown first. Display synonyms Please check the following to make sure that your search string is valid: If you have used more than one keyword try searching again with AND or OR operators between the keywords. Example: If 'cancer blood' returns no results, try searching again for 'cancer AND blood'. Some characters and words are considered to be 'noise' and are not recognized by the search engine. Click here to view the (main) noise terms. Make sure the ( * ) is used correctly. More details on how to use wildcards are in the search tips If you need help with your search, please send and email to ictrpinfo@who.int and a member of our team will respond within 2-4 working days. Disclaimer: Trials posted on this search portal are not endorsed by WHO, but are provided as a service to our users. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for any damages arising from the use of the information linked to in this section. None of the information obtained through use of the search portal should in any way be used in clinical care without consulting a physician or licensed health professional. WHO is not responsible for the accuracy, completeness and/or use made of the content displayed for any trial record. Copyright - World Health Organization - Version 3.6 - Version history For crawlers -->