1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2024 Sep;22(9):1303-1315. doi: 10.1111/ddg.15513. Epub 
2024 Aug 27.

S2k guideline lipedema.

Faerber G(1), Cornely M(2), Daubert C(3), Erbacher G(4), Fink J(5), Hirsch T(6), 
Mendoza E(7), Miller A(8), Rabe E(9), Rapprich S(10), Reich-Schupke S(11), 
Stücker M(12), Brenner E(13).

Author information:
(1)Center for Vascular Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)LY.SEARCH, Institute for Basic Lymphology Research, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)SRH University of Applied Health Sciences, Karlsruhe, Germany.
(4)European Center for Lymphology, Földiklinik, Hinterzarten, Germany.
(5)Center for Obesity and Metabolic Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(6)Office for Internal Medicine and Vascular Diseases, Halle, Germany.
(7)Venenpraxis Wunstorf, Wunstorf, Germany.
(8)Office for Dermatology and Venereology, Allergology, Phlebology, Berlin, 
Germany.
(9)Private Office for Dermatology & Phlebology, Bonn, Germany.
(10)Dermatology Bad Soden, Bad Soden, Germany.
(11)Private Office for Dermatology and Vascular Medicine, Recklinghausen, 
Germany.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Catholic Hospital 
Bochum, St. Josef Hospital, University Medical Center, Ruhr University Bochum, 
Bochum, Germany.
(13)Institute for Clinical and Functional Anatomy, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

This S2k guideline was developed on the initiative and under the German Society 
of Phlebology and Lymphology (DGPL) leadership. The guideline aims to optimize 
the diagnosis and treatment of lipedema. It is intended to bring together the 
different approaches of the respective professional groups in a consensus-based 
manner and thus offer a basic concept for the best possible treatment of 
patients with lipedema. Sixty recommendations were formulated and agreed on in 
diagnostics, conservative and surgical treatment options, psychosocial factors 
and self-management. The guideline is intended to reflect the current scientific 
knowledge and be widely used for diagnosis and treatment recommendations for 
patients with lipedema. In particular, the guideline comments on diagnostic 
criteria, differential diagnoses, and coinciding clinical pictures, their 
influence on diagnosis and treatment, sensible treatment measures, and 
self-management options. The lipedema guideline summarizes the current national 
and international evidence and the German expert consensus and derives 
recommendations for the best treatment for patients with lipedema. The 
recommendations in the guideline are intended as an orientation aid in the sense 
of action and decision-making corridors from which deviations are possible in 
justified cases.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft 
published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH on behalf of Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.15513
PMID: 39188170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]