EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of patients with
decompensated cirrhosis q
European Association for the Study of the Liver ⇑
Summary
The natural history of cirrhosis is characterised by an asymp-
tomatic compensated phase followed by a decompensated
phase, marked by the development of overt clinical signs, the
most frequent of which are ascites, bleeding, encephalopathy,
and jaundice. The following Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs)
represent the ﬁrst CPGs on the management of decompensated
cirrhosis. In this context, the panel of experts, having empha-
sised the importance of initiating aetiologic treatment for any
degree of hepatic disease at the earliest possible stage, extended
its work to all the complications of cirrhosis, which had not
been covered by the European Association for the Study of the
Liver guidelines, namely: ascites, refractory ascites, hypona-
tremia, gastrointestinal bleeding, bacterial infections, acute kid-
ney injury, hepatorenal syndrome, acute-on-chronic liver
failure, relative adrenal failure, cirrhotic cardiomyopathy, hep-
atopulmonary syndrome, and porto-pulmonary hypertension.
The panel of experts, produced these GPGs using evidence from
PubMed and Cochrane database searches providing up to date
guidance on the management of decompensated cirrhosis with
the only purpose of improving clinical practice.
/C2112018 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Introduction
When the panel of experts nominated by the European Associ-
ation for the Study of the Liver (EASL) governing board began
work to update the Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) on
ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP), and hepatorenal
syndrome (HRS),
1 it became obvious that all other complica-
tions of decompensated cirrhosis had to be covered. Within this
framework, a formal deﬁnition of decompensated cirrhosis was
sought. The natural history of cirrhosis is characterised by a
silent, asymptomatic course until increasing portal pressure
and worsening liver function produce a clinical phenotype. In
the asymptomatic phase of the disease, usually referred to as
compensated cirrhosis, patients may have a good quality of life,
and the disease may progress undetected for several years.
Decompensation is marked by the development of overt clinical
signs, the most frequent of which are ascites, bleeding,
encephalopathy, and jaundice. Following the ﬁrst appearance
of any of these, the disease usually progresses more rapidly
towards death or liver transplantation (LT). This phase of the
disease has been designated ‘‘decompensated cirrhosis”.
2
Progression of the decompensated disease may be further accel-
erated by the development of other complications such as
rebleeding, acute kidney injury (AKI), with or without the
features of HRS, hepato-pulmonary syndrome (HPS), portopul-
monary hypertension (PPHT), cirrhotic cardiomyopathy (CCM),
and bacterial infections. Indeed, the development of bacterial
infections as well as hepatocellular carcinoma may accelerate
the course of the disease at any stage, but especially in decom-
pensated cirrhosis.
3 Having deﬁned the potential ﬁeld of action,
and having emphasised the importance of initiating aetiologic
treatment for any degree of hepatic disease at the earliest pos-
sible stage, the panel decided to extend the work to all those
complications of cirrhosis which have not yet been covered by
EASL guidelines, namely: gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, bacte-
rial infections other than SBP, acute-on-chronic liver failure
(ACLF), adrenal failure, HPS, PPHT and CCM. In doing so, we have
had to deal with the recommendations regularly proposed by
very well recognised international expert groups who have
worked in the ﬁeld of GI bleeding or ascites and ascites-related
complications for many years. Given their extreme importance
in clinical practice, only speciﬁc aspects of their recommenda-
tions were further developed in an attempt to give a more inte-
grated view of the pathophysiology and management of patients
with decompensated cirrhosis. Thus, this document can no longer
be considered an update of earlier guidelines, but rather the ﬁrst
CPG on the management of decompensated cirrhosis with the
sole purpose of improving clinical practice.
Guidelines development process
A panel of hepatologists with a great interest in decompen-
sated cirrhosis, approved by the EASL Governing Board, wrote
and discussed this CPG between March 2017 and February
2018. The guidelines were independently peer reviewed, and
all contributors to the CPG disclosed their conﬂicts of interest
by means of a disclosure form provided by the EASL Ofﬁce
prior to work commencing. The EASL Ethics Committee
reviewed the composition of the panel to eliminate the
potential for real or perceived bias. The CPG panel conﬂict of
interests are declared in this submission. These guidelines have
been produced using evidence from PubMed and Cochrane
database searches before 27 March 2018. Tables describing
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
q Clinical Practice Guideline Panel: Paolo Angeli (Chair), Mauro Bernardi
(Governing Board representative), CÁndid Villanueva, Claire Francoz, Rajeshwar
P. Mookerjee, Jonel Trebicka, Aleksander Krag, Wim Laleman, Pere Gines
⇑ Corresponding author. Address: European Association for the Study of the Liver
(EASL), The EASL Building – Home of Hepatology, 7 rue Daubin, CH 1203 Geneva,
Switzerland. Tel.: +41 (0) 22 807 03 60; fax: +41 (0) 22 328 07 24.
E-mail address: easlofﬁce@easlofﬁce.eu.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Clinical Practice Guidelines
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

the rationale behind the levels of evidence and of recommen-
dations are provided ( Table 1 ).
Pathophysiology of decompensated cirrhosis
The transition from compensated asymptomatic cirrhosis to
decompensated cirrhosis occurs at a rate of about 5% to 7% per
year.4 Once decompensation has occurred, cirrhosis becomes a
systemic disease, with multi-organ/system dysfunction. 5 At this
stage, patients become highly susceptible to bacterial infections
because of complex cirrhosis-associated immune dysfunction,
which involves both innate and acquired immunity. 6 In turn,
patients with bacterial infections are burdened by severe mor-
bidity, up to ACLF, and high mortality.
6,7 Because of these events,
decompensation represents a prognostic watershed, as the med-
ian survival drops from more than 12 years for compensated cir-
rhosis to about two years for decompensated cirrhosis.
4 For
decades the clinical manifestations of decompensated cirrhosis
have been seen as the consequence of a haemodynamic distur-
bance, the hyperdynamic circulatory syndrome, ascribable to
peripheral arterial vasodilation that mainly occurs in the
splanchnic circulatory area. The extent of such vasodilation is
to endanger effective volaemia, ultimately leading to peripheral
organ hypoperfusion, the kidney being most affected.
8 Indeed,
reduced effective volaemia brings about the activation of vaso-
constrictor and water and sodium retaining mechanisms, such
as the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAAS), sympathetic ner-
vous system and arginine-vasopressin secretion. This explains
some of the cardinal features of decompensated cirrhosis, such
as renal retention of sodium and water leading to ascites forma-
tion and HRS. Other manifestations attributable to haemody-
namic abnormalities include HPS, increased susceptibility to
shock, and a reduced cardiovascular responsiveness to physio-
logical and pharmacological vasoconstrictor stimuli. Subsequent
studies have highlighted that a cardiac dysfunction, due to CCM,
9
is also involved in the pathogenesis of effective hypovolaemia. 10
This occurs particularly in the most advanced stages of decom-
pensation, when such an abnormality prevents cardiac output
from increasing enough to comply with the needs of systemic
circulation. Although the molecular mechanisms responsible
for arterial vasodilation, consisting of an enhanced endothelial
production of vasodilating substances, such as nitric oxide, car-
bon monoxide, prostacyclin and endocannabinoids have been
convincingly demonstrated,
11 the primary causes of such abnor-
malities remained somewhat obscure until it became clear that
patients with advanced cirrhosis present a state of chronic
inﬂammation, as witnessed by increased circulating levels of
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines.
12 This is likely
caused by the systemic spread of bacteria and bacterial products,
called pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), as a
result of an abnormal bacterial translocation (BT). Changes in
the microbiome and increased intestinal permeability account
for this phenomenon. A similar role is likely played by other
molecules, called danger associated molecular patterns
(DAMPs), released by the diseased liver because of local inﬂam-
mation and cell apoptosis and necrosis. Both PAMPs and DAMPs
bind with innate recognition receptors of immune cells that,
once activated, produce and release pro-inﬂammatory mole-
cules, along with reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. This cas-
cade of events contributes to the development of circulatory
dysfunction and, along with it, directly favours the development
of multi-organ dysfunction and failure ( Fig. 1 ).
5 Current strate-
gies for prophylaxis and treatment of decompensation and organ
failure in cirrhosis rely on measures aimed to prevent or improve
the outcome of each complication, that is renal sodium retention
leading to ascites formation, ammonia production in hepatic
encephalopathy, effective hypovolaemia after large-volume
paracentesis (LVP) or during HRS, renal dysfunction induced by
SBP, and intestinal dysbiosis or bacterial overgrowth in patients
predisposed to develop infections. All these strategies will be
discussed in these CPGs. However, the improved knowledge of
the pathophysiological background of decompensated cirrhosis
now offers the opportunity for more comprehensive therapeutic
and prophylactic approaches to disease management. Indeed,
besides treating the underlying aetiologic factor(s), whenever
possible, mechanistic approaches to counteract key pathophysi-
ologic mechanisms may prevent or delay disease progression
and the incidence of complications and multi-organ dysfunction,
thus improving patient survival and quality of life, as well as
reducing the economic burden of the disease.
Management of decompensated cirrhosis
Ideally, the strategy of management of patients with decompen-
sated cirrhosis should be based on preventing cirrhosis progres-
sion ( i.e. further decompensation) rather than treating
complications as they occur. The ultimate treatment for decom-
pensated cirrhosis would be one that targets primarily the
pathological alterations within the liver with the aim of restor-
ing the integrity of liver architecture by suppressing inﬂamma-
tion, causing ﬁbrosis regression, regularising the portal and
arterial circulation, and normalising cell number and function.
Unfortunately, such a treatment does not exist at present. Sev-
eral antiﬁbrotic or anti-inﬂammatory drugs have shown pro-
mise in experimental models of chronic liver diseases, but no
treatment has yet been translated into clinical practice.
13 Mean-
while, the overall management of decompensated cirrhosis can
be addressed using two approaches. The ﬁrst approach is the
suppression of the aetiological factor(s) that has caused liver
inﬂammation and cirrhosis development, whereas the second
Table 1 . Level of Evidence and Grade of Recommendations.
Level of evidence
I Randomised, controlled trials
II-1 Controlled trials without randomisation
II-2 Cohort and case-control analytical studies
II-3 Multiple time series, dramatic uncontrolled experiments
III Opinions of respected authorities, descriptive epidemiology
Grade of recommendations
1 Strong recommendation: Factors inﬂuencing the strength of the recommendation included the quality of the evidence, presumed
patient-important outcomes, and cost
2 Weaker recommendation: Variability in preferences and values, or more uncertainty: more likely a weak recommendation is
warranted. Recommendation is made with less certainty: higher cost or resource consumption
Clinical Practice Guidelines
2 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

approach is based on targeting key factors of pathogenesis of
cirrhosis decompensation and progression.
Effects of suppression of aetiological factor on
outcome of decompensated cirrhosis
Removal of the aetiological factor(s) causing liver injury is an
important cornerstone in the management of cirrhosis. This
approach is clearly effective in preventing decompensation
and improving outcome in patients with compensated cirrhosis.
However, results in patients with decompensated cirrhosis are
less efﬁcacious and probably depend, among other factors, on
the actual status of liver disease at the time of removing the
aetiological factor of liver injury. For example, although in some
patients with decompensated alcoholic cirrhosis suppression of
alcohol consumption is associated with progressive ‘‘re-com-
pensation” of cirrhosis and excellent long-term outcome, in
other patients alcoholic cirrhosis progresses despite stopping
alcohol intake.
14,15 Likewise, in patients with cirrhosis due to
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, treatment with antiviral
agents is associated with improved outcome in some, but not
all patients.
16 Moreover, treatment of patients with decompen-
sated cirrhosis due to hepatitis C virus infection with direct
antiviral agents is associated with beneﬁcial effects in liver
function and portal hypertension and likely improves outcome,
but these effects are unfortunately not generalisable to all
patients treated.
17,18 The beneﬁcial effects of removing respon-
sible factors in other aetiologies of decompensated cirrhosis are
less clear, perhaps with the exception of autoimmune hepatitis.
Effects of targeting key pathogenic events in
prevention of cirrhosis progression
Several strategies have been evaluated to prevent disease pro-
gression in patients with decompensated cirrhosis, including i)
targeting microbiome abnormalities and BT, to improve gut-liver
axis; ii) improving the disturbed circulatory function; iii) treating
the inﬂammatory state; and iv) targeting portal hypertension.
Administration of rifaximin has been shown to reduce the
risk of development of several complications of cirrhosis besides
hepatic encephalopathy in retrospective studies and small case
series.
19 Nonetheless, data from prospective randomised dou-
ble-blind studies are lacking. In patients with decompensated
cirrhosis, treatment with norﬂoxacin reduces the risk of SBP
and HRS,
20,21 but its use is hampered by the possibility of
increased risk of infection by resistant bacteria. The potential
effectiveness of improving circulatory and kidney function by
long-term administration of albumin to patients with decom-
pensated cirrhosis has been explored in two recent randomised
controlled trials (RCTs), both published in abstract form, with
contradictory ﬁndings.
22,23 The discrepant ﬁndings may be
related to different doses of albumin used and/or heterogeneity
in the study population. Further studies are needed to ﬁnd out
whether long-term albumin administration is efﬁcacious in
decompensated cirrhosis. Interestingly, treatment with statins,
through their pleotropic effects, has been shown to reduce portal
hypertension and improve survival in patients with advanced
cirrhosis.
24,25 These remarkable effects require validation in
future studies. Another potential terapeutical strategy in the
prevention of decompensation may be anticoagulation. Indeed,
in a small RCT, a 12-month course of enoxaparin was safe and
effective in preventing portal vein thrombosis (PVT) in patients
with cirrhosis and a Child-Pugh scores of 7–10. In addition,
enoxaparin appeared to delay the occurrence of hepatic decom-
pensation and to improve survival suggesting that both PVT and
decompensation may be related to a worsening of portal hyper-
tension and the consequent progressive damage of the intestinal
mucosal barrier.
26 From the same perspective, two other strate-
gies should be considered. In 2010, it was shown that pentoxi-
fylline treatment signiﬁcantly reduced the risk of liver-related
complications compared to placebo in an RCT of patients with
advanced cirrhosis. The prevention of these complications,
which included bacterial infections, renal failure, and hepatic
encephalopathy was probably related to the fact that pentoxi-
fylline prevents intestinal BT and the consequent development
of systemic inﬂammation.
27 Finally, some investigations have
shown that treatment with propranolol is not only effective in
reducing portal hypertension and the consequent the risk of var-
iceal bleeding but also in decreasing the risk of other complica-
tions of cirrhosis related to portal hypertension, such as ascites,
HRS, SBP, and hepatic encephalopathy.
28 These effects occur
speciﬁcally in patients who respond to propranolol treatment
by markedly decreasing portal pressure, emphasising the strong
relationship between pressure and complications of cirrhosis.
Nevertheless, in these studies most of patients had compensated
cirrhosis. Therefore, studies should be performed in the group of
patients with decompensated cirrhosis with the objective of
assessing these beneﬁcial effects in cirrhosis progression.
Recommendations
/C15 In patients with decompensated cirrhosis, the aetiologi-
cal factor, should be removed, particularly alcohol con-
sumption and hepatitis B or C virus infection as this
strategy is associated with decreased risk of decompen-
sation and increased survival (II-2,1).
/C15 Strategies based on targeting abnormalities in gut-liver
axis by antibiotic administration ( i.e. rifaximin), improv-
ing the disturbed systemic circulatory function ( i.e. long-
term albumin administration), decreasing the inﬂamma-
tory state ( i.e. statins), and reducing portal hypertension
(i.e. beta-blockers) have shown potential beneﬁt to
decrease cirrhosis progression in patients with decom-
pensated cirrhosis. However, further clinical research is
needed with these strategies to conﬁrm their safety
and potential beneﬁts as therapeutic approaches with
the aim of preventing cirrhosis progression in decom-
pensated patients.
Management of speciﬁc complications of
decompensated cirrhosis
Ascites
Ascites is the most common cause of decompensation in cirrhosis,
as 5% to 10% of patients with compensated cirrhosis per year
develop this complication. 29 The mainstay of ascites formation
is renal sodium retention due to the activation of sodium retain-
ing systems, such as the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
(RAAS) and sympathetic nervous system. The resulting positive
ﬂuid balance ultimately leads to extracellular ﬂuid volume
expansion. Reduced effective volaemia secondary to splanchnic
arterial vasodilation is a main determinant of these alterations,
8
but renal function abnormalities induced by systemic inﬂammation
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 3
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

also play a role, especially in the most advanced stages of cirrho-
sis.5 Portal hypertension also contributes 30 by acting as a com-
partmentalising factor of the expanded extracellular ﬂuid
volume.
The occurrence of ascites impairs patient working and social
life, often leads to hospitalisation, requires chronic treatment
and is a direct cause of further complications, such as SBP,
restrictive ventilatory dysfunction, or abdominal hernias. The
appearance of ascites heralds a poor prognosis, as the ﬁve-year
survival drops from about 80% in compensated patients to about
30% in patients with decompensated cirrhosis and ascites.
4
Uncomplicated ascites
Evaluation of patients with ascites
Cirrhosis is the main cause of ascites in the Western world, being
responsible for about 80% of cases. Malignancy, heart failure,
tuberculosis, pancreatic disease, or other rarer diseases account
for the remaining cases. Initial patient evaluation should include
history, physical examination, abdominal ultrasound, and labo-
ratory assessment of liver and renal functions, serum and urine
electrolytes, as well as an analysis of the ascitic ﬂuid.
Diagnosis of ascites
Ascites can be graded from 1 to 3 according to the amount of
ﬂuid in the abdominal cavity
31 (Table 2). The ascites that recurs
at least on three occasions within a 12-month period despite
dietary sodium restriction and adequate diuretic dosage is
deﬁned as recidivant. 32
Diagnostic paracentesis is indicated in all patients with new
onset of grade 2 or 3 ascites and in those admitted to the hospi-
tal for any complication of cirrhosis. 31,32 Manual or automated
neutrophil count, total protein and albumin concentration,
and culture should be always assessed. A neutrophil count
above 250 cells/
ll denotes SBP. 33 A total protein concentration
<1.5 g/dl is generally considered a risk factor for SBP, although
there are conﬂicting data.
33,34 Ascitic ﬂuid culture requires the
bedside inoculation of at least 10 ml into blood culture bottles
to enhance its sensitivity. 35 The calculation of serum-ascites
albumin gradient (SAAG) may be useful when the cause of
ascites is not immediately evident, as SAAG ≥1.1 g/dl indicates
that portal hypertension is involved in ascites formation with
an accuracy of about 97%.
36 Other tests, such as amylase, cytol-
ogy, or culture for mycobacteria should be guided by clinical
presentation. Ascitic cholesterol determination followed by
cytology and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) determination
in samples where cholesterol concentration exceeds 45 mg/dl
appears to be a cost-effective method for the differential diag-
nosis between malignancy-related and non-malignant ascites.
37
Recommendations
/C15 A diagnostic paracentesis is recommended in all patients
with new onset grade 2 or 3 ascites, or in those hospi-
talised for worsening of ascites or any complication of
cirrhosis (II-2;1).
/C15 Neutrophil count and culture of ascitic ﬂuid culture
(bedside inoculation blood culture bottles with 10 ml
ﬂuid each) should be performed to exclude bacterial
peritonitis. A neutrophil count above 250 cells/
lli s
required to diagnose SBP (II-2;1).
/C15 Ascitic total protein concentration should be performed
to identify patients at higher risk of developing SBP
(II-2;1).
/C15 The SAAG should be calculated when the cause of ascites
is not immediately evident, and/or when conditions
other than cirrhosis are suspected (II-2;1).
/C15 Cytology should be performed to differentiate malig-
nancy-related from non-malignant ascites (II-2;1).
Adrenal 
dysfunction HE Kidney 
dysfunction
HPS
++
Bacterial translocation
PAMPs
Activation if innate pattern
recognition receptors
Release of pro-inflamamtory molecules
(ROS/RNS)
Splanchnic arteriolar vasodilation
and cardiovascular dysfunction
Portal hypertension
Cirrhosis
Liver injury
Damaged cells
DAMPs
Other potential
mechanisms
Fig. 1. The new theory on the development of complications and organ failure/s in patients with cirrhosis (adapted from Ref. 5). DAMP, damage-
associated molecular pattern; HE, hepatic encephalopathy; HPS, hepatopulmonary syndrome; PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular pattern; RNS, re active
nitrogen species; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
4 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Prognosis of patients with ascites
The development of ascites in patients with cirrhosis is associ-
ated with a poor prognosis, as their one and two-year mortality
is about 40 and 50%, respectively.
1 Thus, patients with ascites
should generally be considered for referral for LT. Hypona-
traemia, low arterial pressure, glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR)
and low renal sodium excretion are independent predictors of
mortality in cirrhosis with ascites.
38 As these parameters are
not included in the Child-Pugh score, and only serum creatinine
(SCr), which overestimates GFR in cirrhosis,
39 is included in the
model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, the most com-
monly used prognostic scores can underestimate the mortality
risk in patients with ascites. Modiﬁcations of the MELD score,
such as the MELD-Na and MELD-Ascites scores have only par-
tially overcome this limitation.
40 Thus, patients with ascites
may not receive adequate priority in transplant lists, and
improved methods to assess prognosis in these patients are
needed. A prognostic score able to identify patients with low
MELD score (<18) at high risk of 12-month adverse outcome
has recently been proposed, but it still has limited application.
41
Recommendation
/C15 Since the development of grade 2 or 3 ascites in patients
with cirrhosis is associated with reduced survival, LT
should be considered as a potential treatment option
(II-2;1).
Management of uncomplicated ascites
Ascites is uncomplicated when it is not infected, refractory or
associated with HRS.
31,32
Grade 1 or mild ascites . No data on the evolution of grade 1
ascites are available, nor it is known whether its treatment
modiﬁes its natural history.
Grade 2 or moderate ascites
. Patients who develop grade 2 ascites
do not require hospitalisation, unless other complications are
present. They have a positive sodium balance, which can be cor-
rected by reducing the dietary sodium intake and increasing
renal sodium excretion with diuretics. Although upright posture
favours renal sodium reabsorption
42 and attenuates the
response to diuretics, 43 there is no evidence that a prolonged
maintenance of the supine position eases the treatment of
ascites.
Sodium restriction. The prophylactic use of salt restriction in
patients who never had ascites is not supported by evidence.
Dietary sodium restriction can lead to the resolution of ascites
in about 10% of patients, 44 especially in those with the ﬁrst epi-
sode of ascites. A clear advantage from the use of low-sodium
diets associated with diuretics has not emerged from clinical tri-
als comparing different dietary regimens. 44,45 Extreme sodium
restriction favours the development of diuretic-induced
hyponatraemia and renal failure. 46 Moreover, even moderate
sodium restriction, when not prescribed with an adequate edu-
cational programme, is often associated with reduced calorie
intake,
47 and may impair nutritional status. The current opinion
is that dietary sodium should only be moderately restricted
(80–120 mmol/day), mainly to avoid excess salt intake.
Recommendations
/C15 A moderate restriction of sodium intake (80–120 mmol/
day, corresponding to 4.6–6.9 g of salt) is recommended
in patients with moderate, uncomplicated ascites (I;1).
This is generally equivalent to a no added salt diet with
avoidance of pre-prepared meals. Adequate nutritional
education of patients on how to manage dietary sodium
is also recommended (II-2;1).
/C15 Diets with a very low sodium content (<40 mmol/day)
should be avoided, as they favour diuretic-induced com-
plications and can endanger a patient’s nutritional status
(II-2;1).
/C15 Prolonged bed rest cannot be recommended because
there is insufﬁcient evidence that it is beneﬁcial in the
treatment of ascites (III;1).
Diuretics. Neither diuretics nor LVP are associated with a survival
beneﬁt because they act downstream of the pathophysiological
cascade, being symptomatic therapies. The negative ﬂuid balance
induced by diuretics should not lead to a body weight loss exceed-
ing 0.5 kg/day in patients without peripheral oedema and
1 kg/day in the presence of peripheral oedema to avoid plasma
volume contraction, ultimately leading to renal failure and
hyponatraemia.
48 Since secondary hyperaldosteronism plays a
pivotal role in the renal sodium retention in patients with cirrho-
sis,
49,50 anti-mineralocorticoid drugs (spironolactone, canrenone
or K-canrenoate) represent a mainstay in the medical treatment
of ascites.50 Four hundred mg/day represents the maximal dosage
usually recommended.31,32 The mechanism of action of anti-min-
eralocorticoids explains their slow effect. In fact, the activated
aldosterone pathway, which involves interaction with a cytosolic
receptor and, then, a nuclear receptor, needs to be exhausted
before their natriuretic effect arises. Therefore, the dosage of
these drugs should not be increased earlier than 72 h. Amiloride,
a diuretic acting in the collecting duct, is less effective than anti-
mineralocorticoids, and should only be used in patients who
develop severe side effects with aldosterone antagonists.
51
Proximal tubular sodium reabsorption promotes renal sodium
retention through various mechanisms, such as increased angio-
tensin II production, sympatho-adrenergic hyperactivity and
reduced renal perfusion.49 As proximal tubular sodium reabsorp-
tion can become relatively prevalent in patients with long-stand-
ing ascites,
52,53 loop diuretics are indicated in this setting.
However, they should be combined with but not substituted for
anti-mineralocorticoids. Indeed, despite their potent activity,
the natriuretic effect of loop diuretics can be completely blunted
by unopposed hyperaldosteronism.
54 Whether diuretic treat-
ment should be initiated with anti-mineralocorticoids alone or
should also include a loop diuretic has long been debated. Two
studies have addressed this matter providing apparently conﬂict-
ing results because of differences in patient populations.
55,56 In
both studies, the effects of a diuretic regimen initially consisting
of spironolactone or K-canrenoate alone at stepwise increasing
Table 2 . Grading of ascites.
Grade 1. Mild ascites: it is only detectable by ultrasound examination
Grade 2. Moderate ascites: it is manifest by moderate symmetrical
distension of abdomen
Grade 3. Large or gross ascites: it provokes marked abdominal distension
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 5
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

dosages (from 100/200 to 400 mg/day), with furosemide added in
non-responder patients, were compared with those of the combi-
nation of anti-mineralocorticoids with furosemide (from 40 to
160 mg/day) from the beginning of treatment. In one study,
56
the response rate, the rapidity of ascites mobilisation and the
incidence of diuretic-induced complications were similar in
both regimens. However, as the sequential treatment required less
dose adjustments, it appeared to be more suitable for treating
ascites on an outpatient basis. In the other study,
55 the combined
regimen achieved the resolution of ascites in a shorter time, with
a lower incidence of side effects, mainly hyperkalemia. Such
divergent results likely arose from differences in the patient
populations. In one study,
56 patients with ascites at the ﬁrst
appearance and well preserved renal function prevailed, while, in
the other,55 most patients had recurrent ascites and many showed
a substantial reduction of GFR. Thus, patients with ascites
at the ﬁrst appearance can conﬁdently be treated with anti-
mineralocorticoids alone, as they will likely develop a satisfactory
response with few side effects. Patients with long-standing,
recurrent ascites should receive the combination therapy, which
likely shortens the time to achieve natriuresis and lowers the
incidence of hyperkalemia.
1 In a randomised double-blind cross-
over trial torasemide induced greater cumulative 24 h diuresis than
furosemide, suggesting that torasemide might be more advanta-
geous in patients exhibiting a weak response to furosemide.57
Following mobilisation of ascites, diuretics should be tapered
to the lowest dosages able to maintain patients with minimal or
no ascites, to minimise side effects. Whenever possible, an aeti-
ologic treatment of the underlying cirrhosis should be insti-
tuted, as this eases the control of ascites in many cases.
Complications of diuretic therapy. The haemodynamic status of
patients with cirrhosis and ascites
8 makes them highly suscep-
tible to rapid reductions in extracellular ﬂuid volume, which
mostly occur with loop diuretics. Thus, renal failure is frequent
in this setting, 48 as is hepatic encephalopathy, also favoured by
increased renal ammonia production. Loop diuretics can also
lead to potassium and magnesium depletion. Hyponatraemia
is another common diuretic-induced side effect in cirrhosis. It
mostly, but not exclusively, occurs with loop diuretics, as they
inhibit Na-K-Cl transporter and, therefore, solute-free water
generation. Plasma volume contraction can also enhance argi-
nine-vasopressin release. Thus, hyponatraemia can also ensue
with anti-mineralocorticoid administration, albeit infrequently.
Most experts agree on at least temporarily withdrawing diuret-
ics when serum sodium concentration decreases below 120–
125 mmol/L. Hyperkalemia, especially in patients with reduced
renal perfusion, and painful gynecomastia are the most com-
mon side effects induced by anti-mineralocorticoids.
Muscle cramps can impair quality of life in patients receiving
diuretics. Albumin infusion can relieve cramps,
58 as well as
baclofen (10 mg/day, with a weekly increase of 10 mg/day up
to 30 mg/day), which was safely used in a recent RCT.
59 One
RCT investigated the use of quinidine at the dose of 400 mg/day
for four weeks in patients with cirrhosis with painful muscle
cramps. Although more effective than placebo, quinidine was
associated with diarrhoea in about one-third of cases requiring
treatment withdrawal.
60 Because of the frequency of diuretic-
induced side effects, especially during the ﬁrst month of treat-
ment,
55 serial measurements of SCr, sodium, and potassium
are warranted. The assessment of urine sodium excretion can
be limited to non-responders, to unveil excessive sodium intake.
Recommendations
/C15 Patients with the ﬁrst episode of grade 2 (moderate)
ascites should receive an anti-mineralocorticoid drug
alone, starting at 100 mg/day with stepwise increases
every 72 h (in 100 mg steps) to a maximum of 400
mg/day if there is no response to lower doses (I;1).
/C15 In patients who do not respond to anti-mineralocorti-
coids, as deﬁned by a body weight reduction of less than
2 kg/week, or in patients who develop hyperkalemia,
furosemide should be added at an increasing stepwise
dose from 40 mg/day to a maximum of 160 mg/day (in
40 mg steps) (I;1).
/C15 Patients with long-standing or recurrent ascites should
be treated with a combination of an anti-mineralocorti-
coid drug and furosemide, the dose of which should be
increased sequentially according to the response, as
explained (I;1).
/C15 Torasemide can be given in patients exhibiting a weak
response to furosemide (I;2).
/C15 During diuretic therapy a maximum weight loss of 0.5
kg/day in patients without oedema and 1 kg/day in
patients with oedema is recommended (II-2;1).
/C15 Once ascites has largely resolved, the dose of diuretics
should be reduced to the lowest effective dose (III;1).
/C15 During the ﬁrst weeks of treatment patients should
undergo frequent clinical and biochemical monitoring
particularly on ﬁrst presentation (I;1).
/C15 In patients presenting with GI haemorrhage, renal
impairment, hepatic encephalopathy, hyponatraemia,
or alterations in serum potassium concentration, these
abnormalities should be corrected before starting diure-
tic therapy (III;1). In these patients, cautious initiation of
diuretic therapy and frequent clinical and biochemical
assessments should be performed (III;1). Diuretic ther-
apy is generally not recommended in patients with per-
sistent overt hepatic encephalopathy (III;1).
/C15 Diuretics should be discontinued if severe hypona-
traemia (serum sodium concentration <125 mmol/L),
AKI, worsening hepatic encephalopathy, or incapacitat-
ing muscle cramps develop (III;1).
/C15 Furosemide should be stopped if severe hypokalemia
occurs (<3 mmol/L). Anti-mineralocorticoids should be
stopped if severe hyperkalemia occurs (>6 mmol/L)(III;1).
/C15 Albumin infusion or baclofen administration (10
mg/day, with a weekly increase of 10 mg/day up to 30
mg/day) are recommended in patients with muscle
cramps (I;1).
Grade 3 or large ascites
. The treatment of choice for the manage-
ment of patients with grade 3 ascites is represented by LVP.
Paracentesis should be performed under strict sterile conditions
using disposable sterile materials. The procedure is associated
with a very low risk of local complications, particularly bleed-
ing
61,62 even in patients with international normalized ratio
Clinical Practice Guidelines
6 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

(INR)>1.5 and platelet count <50,000/ ll, minor bleeding from
puncture site occurred in two out of 142 paracentesis. 61 Thus,
there are no data supporting the prophylactic use of fresh frozen
plasma of pooled platelets, even though these are employed in
many centres when prothrombin activity is below 40% and pla-
telet count <40,000/
ll. LVP should be avoided in the presence of
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Other contraindications
to LVP are reported ( Table 3 ).
The removal of large volumes of ascitic ﬂuid is potentially
associated with a further reduction of effective blood volume, a
condition known as post-paracentesis circulatory dysfunction
(PPCD).63 The clinical manifestations of PPCD are renal failure,
dilutional hyponatraemia, hepatic encephalopathy and
decreased survival. 63 Plasma volume expansion should be per-
formed at the completion of LVP to prevent this complication.
Artiﬁcial plasma expanders, such as dextran-70 (8 g/L of ascites
removed)
64 or polygeline (150 ml/L), 64 saline solution (170 ml/
L),65 only show a similar efﬁcacy to 20% albumin (8 g/L) 64 when
less than 5 L of ascites are removed. However, polygeline is no
longer used in many countries because of the potential risk of
transmission of prions and dextran carries the risk of severe aller-
gic reaction and renal failure. A meta-analysis of randomised tri-
als showed that albumin is superior to any other plasma expander
or vasoconstrictor not only in preventing PPCD, but also its clini-
cal consequences, such as hyponatraemia and mortality.
66 More-
over, albumin infusion after LVP appears to be more cost-effective
than a cheaper plasma volume expander, such as polygeline,
because of the lower number of liver-related complications and
hospital costs for a 30-day period.
67 LVP combined with infusion
of albumin in patients with grade 3 ascites is more effective and
safer than diuretics. 68,69 However, LVP does not modify the
underlying pathophysiological abnormalities leading to ascites
formation. Thus, patients treated with LVP require diuretic ther-
apy to prevent the re-accumulation of ascites.
70
Recommendations
/C15 LVP is the ﬁrst-line therapy in patients with large ascites
(grade 3 ascites), which should be completely removed
in a single session (I;1).
/C15 LVP should be followed with plasma volume expansion
to prevent PPCD (I;1).
/C15 In patients undergoing LVP of greater than 5 L of ascites,
plasma volume expansion should be performed by infus-
ing albumin (8 g/L of ascites removed), as it is more
effective than other plasma expanders, which are not
recommended for this setting (I;1).
/C15 In patients undergoing LVP of less than 5 L of ascites, the
risk of developing PPCD is low. However, it is generally
agreed that these patients should still be treated with
albumin because of concerns about use of alternative
plasma expanders (III;1).
/C15 After LVP, patients should receive the minimum dose of
diuretics necessary to prevent re-accumulation of ascites
(I;1).
/C15 When needed, LVP should also be performed in patients
with AKI or SBP (III;1).
Drugs contraindicated in patients with ascites
As non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs inhibit renal prosta-
glandin synthesis, they should not be used in patients with cir-
rhosis and ascites, where an increased vasodilating
prostaglandin synthesis counteracts the renal vasoconstrictor
effects of angiotensin II. Indeed, their administration can lead
to acute renal failure, hyponatraemia, and diuretic resistance.
71
It would appear that selective inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-2 do
not impair renal function and response to diuretics in patients
with ascites. 72 However, it is not known whether these drugs
can be safely used in clinical practice when analgesia is needed.
Patients with ascites are also particularly sensitive to the renal
vasoconstrictor effect of endogenous adenosine, and dipyri-
damole can induce a marked reduction in renal perfusion.
73
The maintenance of an adequate arterial pressure in cirrhosis
with ascites is assured by the activation of endogenous vasocon-
strictor systems. Thus, angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors,
74 angiotensin II receptor antagonists, and a1-adren-
ergic blockers 75 should be avoided, as they can induce arterial
hypotension and renal function impairment. Aminoglycosides
should be avoided in the treatment of bacterial infections,
except in speciﬁc cases (discussed later), because they are asso-
ciated with high incidence of nephrotoxicity.
76 Although cirrho-
sis with ascites and preserved renal function does not appear to
be a risk factor for renal failure induced by contrast media, 77
this cannot be excluded in patients with impaired renal func-
tion. In these cases, preventive measures such as plasma volume
expansion with saline may be employed.
78
Recommendations
/C15 Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs should not be
used in patients with ascites because of the high risk of
developing further sodium retention, hyponatraemia,
and AKI (II-2;1).
/C15 Angiotensin-converting-enyzme inhibitors, angiotensin
II antagonists, or a1-adrenergic receptor blockers should
not generally be used in patients with ascites because of
increased risk of renal impairment (II-2;1).
/C15 The use of aminoglycosides is discouraged, as they are
associated with an increased risk of AKI. Their use should
be reserved for patients with severe bacterial infections
that cannot be treated with other antibiotics (II-2;1).
/C15 In patients with ascites and preserved renal function, the
use of contrast media does not appear to be associated
with an increased risk of renal impairment (II-2). There
are insufﬁcient data in patients with renal failure. Never-
theless, a cautious use of contrast media and the use of
preventive measures for renal impairment are recom-
mended (III;1).
Table 3 . Contraindications to paracentesis.
/C15 Uncooperative patient
/C15 Abdominal skin infection at the proposed puncture sites
/C15 Pregnancy
/C15 Severe coagulopathy (accelerated ﬁbrinolysis or disseminated
intravascular coagulation)
/C15 Severe bowel distension
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 7
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Refractory ascites
Evaluation of patients with refractory ascites
According to the criteria of the International Ascites Club, refrac-
tory ascites is deﬁned as ‘‘ascites that cannot be mobilised or the
early recurrence of which ( i.e., after LVP) cannot be satisfactorily
prevented by medical therapy”. 31,32 The diagnostic criteria of
refractory ascites are shown in Table 4. Refractoriness of ascites
is associated with a poor prognosis, with a median survival of
about six months.79 Therefore, if a patient with refractory ascites
has not yet been considered for LT, he/she should be immediately
referred to a liver transplant center. The potential underestimation
of the mortality risk by commonly used prognostic scores, as dis-
cussed earlier also applies to patients with refractory ascites.
80
Recommendations
/C15 The diagnosis of refractory ascites relies on the assess-
ment of the response of ascites to diuretic therapy and
salt restriction. Such an evaluation should be done in
stable patients without associated complications, such
as bleeding or infection, after ascertaining patient com-
pliance to treatment (III;1).
/C15 Patients with refractory ascites should be evaluated for
LT (III;1).
Management of refractory ascites
Large-volume paracentesis
. There is general agreement that LVP
is an effective and safe treatment of refractory ascites, 31,35
which should be associated with albumin administration to pre-
vent PPCD.
Diuretics in patients with refractory ascites . Once refractoriness of
ascites has been ascertained, diuretics should be discontinued.
Only when renal sodium excretion on diuretics exceeds 30
mmol/day, maintenance of diuretic therapy can be considered,
when tolerated.
31
Non-selective beta-blockers in patients with refractory ascites . The
controversial issue on the use of non-selective beta-blockers
(NSBBs) in patients with ascites and, particularly, in those with
refractory ascites will be developed in the section dedicated to
GI bleeding.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts . Transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (TIPS) decompresses the portal
system by shunting an intrahepatic portal branch into a hepatic
vein. Its insertion accentuates perpheral arterial vasodilation in
the short term. However, within 4–6 weeks its result is an
improvement in effective volaemia and renal function, ultimately
leading to an increase in renal sodium excretion.
81–85 TIPS-
induced natriuresis can be delayed by advanced age and reduced
pre-TIPS GFR,
84 and prevented by intrinsic kidney disease.86 TIPS
may also exert beneﬁcial effects on nitrogen balance and nutri-
tion87 and quality of life.88 A major complication after TIPS inser-
tion using bare stent grafts is the development of hepatic
encephalopathy, which can occur in up to 50% of patients. 89,90
The incidence of this complication can be signiﬁcantly reduced
to about 18% with the use of polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE)-cov-
ered stent grafts of 8 mm, 91 a result conﬁrmed by a recent ran-
domised trial comparing 8 mm and 10 mm stent grafts. 92
Notably, this favourable effect is better than with larger stent
grafts underdilated to 8 mm. Indeed, it has been shown that
underdilated 10 mm stent grafts passively expand to almost the
full diameter within 1–6 weeks.
93 It must be underlined that the
indication for TIPS insertion in these studies was the prevention
or treatment of recurrent bleeding, which may restrict the rele-
vance of these results in patients with refractory ascites. Dysfunc-
tion of TIPS with bare stent grafts because of stent thrombosis and
stenosis can develop in up to 80% of cases.
89 This complication has
been signiﬁcantly reduced with the use of PTFE-covered stents.94
Controlled studies and meta-analysis. The clinical effects of TIPS
with bare stents in patients with refractory or recurrent ascites
have been assessed in six prospective RCTs,
95–100 whose main
features are reported ( Table 5 ). Based on these RCTs, seven
meta-analyses were performed. 101–107 The ﬁnal messages can
be summarised as follow: i) TIPS controlled ascites better than
LVP, and ii) TIPS is followed by a greater incidence of hepatic
encephalopathy. However, discrepant results were obtained
with respect to survival. A better survival with LVP, mainly
because of a detrimental effect of TIPS in Child-Pugh class C
patients, was reported by one study,
96 while no difference was
reported by two. 95,100 A better survival with TIPS was reported
Table 4 . Deﬁnition and diagnostic criteria for refractory ascites in cirrhosis.
Deﬁnition
Diuretic-resistant ascites Ascites that cannot be mobilized or the early recurrence of which cannot be prevented because of a lack of response to sodi um
restriction and diuretic treatment
Diuretic-intractable
ascites
Ascites that cannot be mobilized or the early recurrence of which cannot be prevented because of the development of diuretic-
induced complications that preclude the use of an effective diuretic dosage
Diagnostic criteria
Treatment duration Patients must be on intensive diuretic therapy (spironolactone 400 mg/day and furosemide 160 mg/day) for at least one week and
on a salt-restricted diet of less than 90 mmol/day
Lack of response Mean weight loss of <0.8 kg over four days and urinary sodium output less than the sodium intake
Early ascites recurrence Reappearance of grade 2 or 3 ascites within four weeks of initial mobilisation
Diuretic-induced
complications
Diuretic-induced hepatic encephalopathy is the development of encephalopathy in the absence of any other precipitating factor
Diuretic-induced renal impairment is an increase of serum creatinine by >100% to a value >2 mg/dl (177 lmol/L) in patients with
ascites responding to treatment
Diuretic-induced hyponatremia is deﬁned as a decrease of serum sodium by >10 mmol/L to a serum sodium of <125 mmol/L
Diuretic-induced hypo- or hyperkalemia is deﬁned as a change in serum potassium to <3 mmol/L or >6 mmol/L despite
appropriate measures
Invalidating muscle cramps
Clinical Practice Guidelines
8 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

in another two studies, 97,99 while, in the remaining one, 98
although a survival advantage was not found, TIPS was indepen-
dently associated with transplant-free survival at multivariate
analysis. In four meta-analyses including the ﬁve studies avail-
able at that time no survival advantantage with TIPS emerged.
However, a trend towards reduced mortality with TIPS was
seen
104 after the exclusion of an outlier trial. 96 The latter was
also excluded in the only meta-analysis on individual patient
data, and an increased transplant-free survival was found. 107
Finally, the two meta-analyses that included all six trials 102,103
provided contrasting results, as an improved transplant-free sur-
vival was found in one,
107 while a survival advantage with TIPS
was limited to patients with recurrent ascites in the other. 102
Fewer studies assessing the effects of TIPS with PTFE-covered
stent grafts are available. Two retrospective studies 108,109
reported better control of ascites and one-year 108 or two-
year109 survival with covered stent grafts than bare stent grafts
in patients with refractory ascites. A survival beneﬁt of TIPS vs.
serial paracentesis in patients with refractory ascites has been
reported in a single-centre case-control propensity score analy-
sis.
110 In a recent RCT comparing covered TIPS vs. LVP in
patients with recurrent ascites, a better one-year transplant-
free survival was seen in patients treated with covered stents,
without any signiﬁcant increase in occurrence of hepatic
encephalopathy.
111 Thus, currently available data suggest that
TIPS improves survival compared to LVP in patients with recur-
rent ascites, but it does not in those with refractory ascites.
A careful selection of patients is also crucial to maximise the
beneﬁcial effects of TIPS, as TIPS can even be detrimental in
patients with the most advanced stages of cirrhosis, such as
those belonging to Child-Pugh class C.
96 The main exclusion cri-
teria for TIPS insertion in the seven RCTs are reported in Table 5.
A score system based on SCr, INR, serum bilirubin and aetiology
of cirrhosis has been proposed to predict survival after TIPS
insertion for refractory ascites.
112 Another simple predictor of
survival suggested for patients receiving TIPS for refractory
ascites consists of the combination of serum bilirubin
concentration and platelet count.
113 Another factor that seems
to inﬂuence mortality is the number of TIPS procedures per-
formed in a centre, as the risk of inpatient mortality is lower
in hospitals performing ≥20 TIPS per year.
114
Other treatments . Based on the exclusion criteria reported
(Table 5 ), a substantial portion of patients with refractory
ascites are not candidates for TIPS insertion. Thus, the search
for alternative treatments is warranted.
Medical treatments. Therapies aimed at improving circulatory
and renal function have been proposed. The a1-adrenergic
agonist midodrine has been shown to improve systemic and
renal haemodynamics in patients with cirrhosis and uncom-
plicated ascites.
115 In a small RCT comparing the addition of
midodrine (7.5 mg t.i.d) to diuretic treatment with diuretic
treatment alone in patients with refractory or recurrent
ascites for six months, only a transient beneﬁcial effect on
the control of ascites was seen at the third month.
116 The
use of terlipressin, an analogue of vasopressin with a predom-
inant vasoconstrictor effect in the splanchnic circulatory area
in patients with refractory ascites has only been assessed in
acute studies. In one,
117 terlipressin administration (1 to
Table 5 . Characteristics and results of six randomised controlled trials comparing bared TIPS and LVP in patients with cirrhosis and refractory or
recidivant ascites.
Refs. Refractory/
recidivant
ascites (%)
Exclusion criteria Enrolled
patients
(N)
Ascites
improved
(%)
Encephalopathy
(%)
Survival
(%)
TIPS LVP TIPS LVP TIPS LVP TIPS LVP
Lebrec et al.
1995
100/0 Age >70 yr; severe extra-hepatic diseases; HCC; pulmonary
hypertension; HE, bacterial infection; severe alcoholic hepatitis; portal
or hepatic vein obstruction or thrombosis; obstruction of biliary tract;
obstruction of hepatic artery; serum creatinine >1.7 mg/dl
13 12 38 0 * 15 6 29 60
Rössle et al.
2000
55/45 HE ≥grade 2; serum bilirubin >5 mg/dl, serum creatinine >3 mg/dl;
portal-vein thrombosis, hepatic hydrothorax; advanced cancer; failure
of LVP (ascites persisting after LVP or need for LVP >once per week)
29 31 84 43 * 23 13 58 32
Ginés et al.
200290
100/0 Age >18 or >75 yr; serum bilirubin >10 mg/dl; prothrombin time <40%
(INR 2.5); platelet count <than 40,000/mm 3; serum creatinine >3 mg/
dl, HCC, complete portal vein thrombosis; cardiac or respiratory
failure; organic renal failure; bacterial infection; chronic HE
35 35 51 17 * 60 34 26 30
Sanyal et al.
2003100
100/0 Causes of ascites other than cirrhosis; advanced liver failure (serum
bilirubin bilirubin >5 mg/dl, PT INR >2); incurable cancers or
nonhepatic diseases that were likely to limit life expectancy to 1 yr;
congestive heart failure; acute renal failure; parenchymal renal
disease; portal vein thrombosis; bacterial infections; HE ≥grade II;
ﬂorid alcoholic hepatitis, HCC; gastrointestinal hemorrhage within 6 w
of randomisation.
52 57 58 16
* 38 21 35 33
Salerno
et al. 200499
68/32 Age > 72 yr; recurrent HE ≥grade 2; serum bilirubin >6 mg/dl; serum
creatinine >3 mg/dl; Child-Pugh score >11; complete portal vein
thrombosis; HCC; gastrointestinal bleeding within 15 d of
randomisation; serious cardiac or pulmonary dysfunctions;bacterial
infection; SAAG gradient <11 g/L.
33 33 79 42 * 61 39 59 29 *
Narahara
et al. 201197
100/0 Age >70 yr, chronic HE, HCC and other malignancies, complete portal
vein thrombosis with cavernomatous transformation, bacterial
infection, severe cardiac or pulmonary disease, organic renal disease.
30 30 87 30
* 20 5 20 5 *
HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HE, hepatic encephalopathy; INR, international normalized ratio; LVP, large volume paracentesis; PT, prothrombi n time; SAAG, serum-
ascites albumin gradient; TIPS, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt.
* Signiﬁcantly lower than TIPS.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 9
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

2 mg intravenous [i.v.], according to body weight) only
increased renal sodium excretion when associated with
exogenous atrial natriuretic factor. In another,
118 2 mg of ter-
lipressin led to an increase in GFR, renal plasma ﬂow and
renal sodium excretion. However, in this study only eight
patients with refractory ascites were included. Whether a
prolonged treatment with terlipressin may lead to a clinically
relevant improvement of renal function and sodium excretion
in refractory ascites is not known.
The
a2-adrenoceptor agonist clonidine, a sympatholytic
drug, which suppresses RAAS activity and improves the
response to diuretics in patients with cirrhosis and ascites
was tested in a large prospective RCT. It was shown that cloni-
dine administration on top of diuretics for three months led to
an overall response to diuretics in 60% of cases, while no
response was seen with diuretics alone. This effect was asso-
ciated with signiﬁcant reductions of RAAS and sympathetic
nervous system activity. Interestingly, the favourable effects
of clonidine were predicted by the variant genotype of G pro-
tein (GNB3 C825T) and adrenergic receptor (ADRA2C Del 322–
325) polymorphisms, and the baseline norepinephrine level.
119
Small scale or pilot studies evaluated the effects of various
combinations of midodrine with either clonidine, 120 the antag-
onist of vasopressin V2-receptors tolvaptan, 121 or octreotide
and albumin 122 in patients with refractory and recurrent
ascites. Some promising results were obtained, but they need
to be conﬁrmed by sufﬁciently powered RCTs. A recent RCT 123
compared the effects of the combined administration of mido-
drine (5 mg t.i.d) and rifaximin (550 mg b.i.d) on top of diuret-
ics for 12 weeks with diuretics alone. After 12 weeks, 80% of
patients in the active arm were complete responders with a
signiﬁcant improvement in survival in the midodrine/rifaximin
arm. Due to weakness in the study design, these results are
not deﬁnitive, but they certainly warrant further investigation.
Alfapump
/C210. The automated low-ﬂow ascites pump (Alfapump /C210)
system consists of a subcutaneously implanted battery-powered
programmable pump. It is connected to catheters that transfer
ascites from the peritoneal cavity to the bladder, from which it
is eliminated with urine. The device has internal sensors that
monitor pump function. In two multicentre safety and efﬁcacy
studies,
124,125 Alfapump/C210ensured a signiﬁcant reduction of the
number and volume of paracentesis in patients with advanced
cirrhosis and refractory ascites. However, adverse effects
directly related to the device occurred in about one-third 124 to
half125 of cases. In a multicentre RCT in patients with refractory
ascites, Alfapump /C210reduced the median number of paracentesis
per month by 85% with respect to LVP, and signiﬁcantly
improved quality of life and nutritional parameters, as assessed
by hand-grip strength and body mass index. Alfapump
/C210had no
effect on survival and was associated with a signiﬁcantly higher
incidence of serious adverse events (85.2 vs. 45.2%), mainly rep-
resented by AKI.
126 Thus, even though Alfapump /C210is effective in
reducing the need for paracentesis in patients with refractory
ascites, its frequent side effects require close monitoring of
patients. Indeed, in addition to device-related adverse event, it
should be noted that the evaluation of kidney and circulatory
function in 10 patients with cirrhosis and refractory ascites
carrying Alfapump
/C210has shown a signiﬁcant GFR decline within
six months, which was associated with a marked increase in
plasma renin activity and norepinephrine concentration.
127 This
likely represented the pathophysiological background of 18
episodes of AKI experienced by seven patients.
Recommendations
/C15 Repeated LVP plus albumin (8 g/L of ascites removed)
are recommended as ﬁrst line treatment for refractory
ascites (I;1).
/C15 Diuretics should be discontinued in patients with refrac-
tory ascites who do not excrete >30 mmol/day of sodium
under diuretic treatment (III;1).
/C15 Although controversial data exist on the use of NSBBs in
refractory ascites, caution should be exercised in cases of
severe or refractory ascites. High doses of NSBB should
be avoided ( i.e. propranolol >80 mg/day) (II-2;1). The
use of carvedilol can not be recommended at present
(I;2).
/C15 Patients with refractory or recurrent ascites (I;1),o r
those for whom paracentesis is ineffective ( e.g. due to
the presence of loculated ascites) should be evaluated
for TIPS insertion (III;1).
/C15 TIPS insertion is recommended in patients with recur-
rent ascites (I;1) as it improves survival (I;1) and in
patients with refractory ascites as it improve the control
of ascites (I;1).
/C15 The use of small-diameter PTFE-covered stents in
patients is recommended to reduce the risk of TIPS dys-
function and hepatic encephalopathy with a high risk of
hepatic encephalopathy is recommended (I;1).
/C15 Diuretics and salt restriction should be continued after
TIPS insertion up to the resolution of ascites (II-2;1),a s
well as close clinical follow-up (III,1).
/C15 Careful selection of patients for elective TIPS insertion is
crucial, as is the experience of the centre performing this
procedure. TIPS is not recommended in patients with
serum bilirubin > 3 mg/dl and a platelet count lower
than 75 x 10
9/L, current hepatic encephalopathy grade
≥2 or chronic hepatic encephalopathy, concomitant
active infection, progressive renal failure, severe systolic
or diastolic dysfunction, or pulmonary hypertension
(III;1).
/C15 At present the addition of clonidine or midodrine to
diuretic treatment cannot be recommended (III;1).
/C15 Alfapump
/C210implantation in patients with refractory
ascites not amenable to TIPS insertion is suggested in
experienced centres. However, close patient monitoring
is warranted because of the high risk of adverse events
including renal dysfunction and technical difﬁculties(I;2).
Clinical Practice Guidelines
10 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Hepatic hydrotorax
Hepatic hydrotorax describes the accumulation of transudate in
the pleural space of patients with decompensated cirrhosis in
the absence of cardiac, pulmonary or pleural disease. Its forma-
tion is secondary to small diaphragmatic defects, more often
located in the right side, through which ascites moves into the
pleural space because of the negative intrathoracic pressure
induced by inspiration. Hepatic hydrothorax can lead to respira-
tory failure and can be complicated by spontaneous bacterial
infections (empyema). Its appearance is associated with poor
prognosis, as the median survival of patients with hepatic
hydrothorax ranges from 8–12 months.
128,129 Notably, the most
common prognostic scores, such as Child-Pugh and MELD, seem
to underestimate such an adverse outcome.
128
Diagnosis of hepatic hydrothorax
Once pleural effusion has been ascertained, cardiopulmonary
and primary pleural diseases should be excluded by standard
clinical approaches. Diagnostic thoracentesis is required to rule
out bacterial infection, whose diagnosis relies on the same crite-
ria described for ascites. The protein content of pleural effusion
in uncomplicated hepatic hydrothorax is low and the serum to
pleural ﬂuid albumin gradient is greater than 1.1 g/dl.
128
The presence and extent of diaphragmatic defects can be
assessed indirectly, by radioisotope techniques, or directly by
magnetic resonance imaging or colour-Doppler
ultrasonography.130,131
Treatment of hepatic hydrothorax
The ﬁrst-line management relies on the treatment of ascites
with diuretics and/or LVP as discussed earlier. However, it is
not rare for pleural effusion to persist despite successful treat-
ment of ascites (refractory hydrothorax). Therapeutic thoracen-
tesis is required to relieve dyspnoea. Its efﬁcacy in refractory
hepatic hydrothorax is transient and repeated thoracentesis
are required, which increase the risk of complications such as
pneumothorax, pleural or soft tissue infection, and bleeding.
132
The frequent occurrence of these complications discourages the
use of chronic pleural drainage, which can also be followed by
renal dysfunction from ﬂuid loss. 133
Whenever indicated and possible, LT represents the best
option for patients with refractory hepatic hydrothorax, which
does not seem to adversely affect the outcome of transplanta-
tion.134,135 TIPS has been effectively employed as deﬁnitive
treatment or bridge to transplantation in patients with refrac-
tory hepatic hydrotorax, whose general outcome seems to be
related to the severity of the underlying cirrhosis. 136,137 These
results have been conﬁrmed by a more recent meta-analysis. 138
Pleurodesis induced by various agents, such as talc, tetracy-
cline, doxycycline, bleomycin and povidone-iodine, can be
offered to patients who are not candidates for TIPS or LT. A
recent meta-analysis showed that the pooled rate of complete
response after pleurodesis was 72%. However, the pooled rate
of complications related to this procedure was as high as
82%.
139 Finally, thoracoscopic repair with mersilene mesh
appears to be effective in patients with well-deﬁned diaphrag-
matic defects. 140 Advanced liver disease, as assessed by MELD
score, and preoperative renal dysfunction appear to adversely
affect three-month survival. Unfortunately, clear cut-off values
cannot be retrieved from that study.
Recommendations
/C15 Patients with hydrothorax should be evaluated for LT
(III;1).
/C15 Cardiopulmonary and primary pleural disease should be
ruled out before diagnosing hepatic hydrothorax (III;1).
Diagnostic thoracentesis should be performed especially
when infection of the pleural effusion is suspected
(III;1).
/C15 Diuretics and thoracentesis are recommended as the
ﬁrst-line management of hepatic hydrothorax (III;1).
/C15 Therapeutic thoracentesis is indicated in patients with
dyspnoea (III;1). Chronic pleural should not be per-
formed because of the frequent occurrence of complica-
tions (II-2;1).
/C15 In selected patients, TIPS insertion for recurrent symp-
tomatic hepatic hydrothorax is recommended (II-2;1).
/C15 Pleurodesis can be suggested to patients with refractory
hepatic hydrothorax not amenable to LT or TIPS inser-
tion. However, the frequent occurrence of side effects
related to this technique restricts its use to selected
patients (I;2).
/C15 Mesh repair of diaphragmatic defects is suggested for
the management of hepatic hydrothorax in very selected
patients. The best results can be achieved in patients
with non-advanced cirrhosis without renal dysfunction
(II-2;2).
Hyponatremia
Deﬁnition and pathophysiology
Hyponatremia is common in patients with advanced cirrhosis,
and has been arbitrarily deﬁned as serum sodium concentra-
tion lower than 130 mmol/L.
141,142 However, according to
guidelines on hyponatremia in the general patient popula-
tion,143 reductions below 135 mmol/L should also be consid-
ered. Patients with hyponatremia have a poor prognosis, as it
is associated with increased mortality
144,145 and morbidity,
particularly neurological complications, 146,147 and reduced sur-
vival after LT. 148 Incorporating serum sodium concentration
into the MELD score, a new score (MELD-Na) was generated
that provides more accurate survival predictions than MELD
alone,149 especially in patients with ascites and hyponatremia
with intermediate MELD score values. 150 Both hypovolaemic
and hypervolaemic hyponatremia can occur in patients with
cirrhosis. The second, most common, is characterised by an
expansion of the extracellular ﬂuid volume, with ascites and
oedema. It may occur spontaneously, or because of excessive
hypotonic ﬂuids ( i.e., 5% dextrose), or secondary to complica-
tions of cirrhosis leading to an abrupt worsening of effective
volaemia. The main drivers are non-osmotic hypersecretion
of vasopressin and enhanced proximal nephron sodium reab-
sorption, which impair free water generation and are both
caused by effective hypovolaemia. As opposed to hyper-
volaemic hyponatremia, hypovolaemic hyponatremia is
characterised by the frequent absence of ascites and oedema.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 11
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

It is caused by a prolonged negative sodium balance with
marked loss of extracellular ﬂuid often due to excessive diure-
tic therapy.
Management of hyponatremia
It is generally considered that hyponatremia should be treated
when serum sodium is lower than 130 mmol/L, although there
is no good evidence regarding the level of serum sodium at
which treatment should be initiated. Hypovolaemic hypona-
tremia requires plasma volume expansion with saline solution
and the correction of the causative factor. The management of
hypervolemic hyponatremia requires attainment of a negative
water balance. Non-osmotic ﬂuid restriction is helpful in pre-
venting a further decrease in serum sodium levels, but it is sel-
dom effective in improving natremia. Hypertonic sodium
chloride administration to patients with decompensated cirrho-
sis may improve natremia but enhances volume overload and
worsens the amount of ascites and oedema. Therefore, it should
be limited to severely symptomatic hyponatremia, as deﬁned by
life-threatening manifestations, cardio-respiratory distress,
abnormal and deep somnolence, seizures and coma, which do
not frequently occur in patients with cirrhosis. Furthermore,
hypertonic sodium chloride administration can be considered
in patients with severe hyponatremia who are expected to get
a liver transplant within a few days. In these cases, hypona-
tremia must not be corrected completely and rapidly to avoid
the risk of central pontine myelinolysis that is increased in
advanced cirrhosis.
143 In practice, after an initial rapid correc-
tion aimed at attenuating clinical symptoms (5 mmol/L in the
ﬁrst hour), serum sodium concentration should not increase
more than 8 mmol/L per day.
143 Albumin infusion appears to
improve serum sodium concentration, but more information is
needed.
151
Vaptans
Vaptans are selective antagonists of the V2-receptors of argi-
nine-vasopressin in the principal cells of the collecting ducts
that enhance solute-free water excretion.
152 Indeed, these
drugs are effective in improving serum sodium concentration
in conditions associated with high vasopressin levels, such as
the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
(SIADH) and heart failure.
152 The effects of the administration
of vaptans to hyponatremic patients with cirrhosis and ascites
have been assessed in several studies. Namely, tolvaptan,
satavaptan and lixivaptan lead to an increased urine volume,
a solute-free water excretion, and an improvement of hypona-
tremia in 45–82% of cases.
153–155 In another study, a short-
term intravenous infusion of conivaptan for one to four days
in patients with end stage liver disease awaiting OLT was also
effective in increasing serum sodium concentration. 156 How-
ever, the safety of vaptans has only been established for
short-term treatments lasting from one week to one month.
When satavaptan was used long term, in addition to diuretics,
despite improving both serum sodium concentration and con-
trol of ascites, a higher all-cause mortality rate, mostly associ-
ated with known complications of cirrhosis, was reported
compared to standard medical treatment.
157,158 Moreover, a
recent study cast doubt on the efﬁcacy of tolvaptan in patients
with cirrhosis and severe hypervolemic hyponatremia (serum
sodium ≤125 mEq/L) in a real-life setting.
159 At present, both
conivaptan and tolvaptan have been approved in the US by
the FDA, while only tolvaptan in Europe has been approved
by the EMA for management of severe hypervolemic hypona-
tremia (<125 mmol/L). The unique indication given for tolvap-
tan by the EMA is SIADH, while the FDA also included heart
failure and liver cirrhosis. However, the occurrence of serious
hepatic injury in three patients with autosomal dominant poly-
cystic kidney disease treated with tolvaptan in a double-blind
placebo-controlled trial
160 led the FDA to conclude that this
drug should not be used in patients with underlying liver
disease.
Recommendations
/C15 The development of hyponatremia (serum sodium con-
centration <130 mmol/L) in patients with cirrhosis car-
ries an ominous prognosis, as it is associated with
increased mortality and morbidity. These patients
should be evaluated for LT (II-2,1).
/C15 The removal of the cause and administration of normal
saline are recommended in the management of hypov-
olemic hyponatremia (III;1).
/C15 Fluid restriction to 1,000 ml/day is recommended in the
management of hypervolemic hyponatremia since it
may prevent a further reduction in serum sodium levels
(III;1).
/C15 The use of hypertonic saline in the management of
hypervolemic hyponatremia should be limited to the
rare cases presenting with life threatening complica-
tions. It could also be considered in patients with severe
hyponatremia who are expected to get LT within a few
days. The correction of serum sodium concentration,
once an attenuation of symptoms has been obtained,
should be slow (≤8 mmol/L per day) to avoid irreversible
neurological sequelae, such as osmotic demyelination
(II-3;1).
/C15 Albumin administration can be suggested in hyperv-
olemic hyponatremia, but data are very limited to sup-
port its use (II-3;2).
/C15 At present, the use of vaptans should be limited to con-
trolled clinical studies (III;1).
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Pathophysiology
Variceal haemorrhage (VH) occurs because of the rupture of
the variceal wall due to excessive wall tension. Variceal wall
tension is an intrinsic property of the vessel wall that opposes
the expansive force determined by variceal transmural pres-
sure, which depends on portal pressure and vessel size. Tissue
support surrounding the varix may counteract the increase in
variceal pressure and size, protecting the wall from rupture.
161
Once variceal wall rupture occurs, the amount of bleeding is
related to transmural pressure (which mainly depends on por-
tal pressure), to the area of rupture in the vessel wall and to
blood viscosity and/or alterations of haemostasis.
161 All these
factors can be inﬂuenced by therapy. Drug therapy and por-
tal-systemic derivative procedures, reduce portal (and variceal)
pressure. Endoscopic therapies and other physical methods,
such as balloon tamponade or expandable prosthesis, act
merely by both interrupting the blood ﬂow into the varix
Clinical Practice Guidelines
12 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

and sealing the vascular wall. Portal pressure is a key factor
determining both variceal rupture and the severity of the
bleeding episode.
161 During acute bleeding, portal pressure
may increase because of different factors such as over-transfu-
sion or absorption of blood from the gut, which may have a
role in failure to control bleeding and/or precipitating rebleed-
ing. Portal pressure is usually assessed by the hepatic venous
pressure gradient (HVPG).
Natural history of gastro-oesophageal varices and variceal
haemorrhage
Variceal haemorrhage, causative of 70% of all upper GI bleed-
ing events in patients with portal hypertension, remains one
of the most severe and immediate life-threatening complica-
tions in patients with cirrhosis and constitutes the second
most frequent decompensating event after ascites.
162,163
Decompensated patients have ‘clinically signiﬁcant portal
hypertension’ (CSPH) per deﬁnition and, consequently, a high
risk of having gastro-oesophageal varices. In fact, while only
42% of Child A patients have gastro-oesophageal varices,
72% of Child B/C patients do.
164 When decompensation devel-
ops, patients without varices on a previous endoscopy should
have a repeat endoscopy performed given the risk of develop-
ing varices due to worsening of portal hypertension and liver
dysfunction. In those without varices at screening, ‘‘ de novo ”
varices develop at a rate of 7–8%/year,
165,166 which could be
higher in patients decompensated due to worsening of portal
hypertension and liver dysfunction. The progression rate from
small to large varices runs up to 22% at one year and 51% at
three years in patients with Child B/C cirrhosis, especially
when alcoholic in origin and/or when red wale marks are pre-
sent at ﬁrst endoscopy, compared to 2% and 16%, respectively,
in compensated patients without those risk factors.
165,166
Prospective studies have consistently demonstrated that the
risk of VH, estimated overall at 5–15% per year, is related
to variceal size.
166–170 This risk is further ampliﬁed by the
severity of liver dysfunction (Child B/C) and/or the presence
of red wale marks on varices. Thus, not only medium/large
varices ( i.e. varices that do not collapse with insufﬂation at
endoscopy), but also small varices with red signs or in Child
C should be considered ‘ high-risk’ varices. Despite improve-
ment in therapy, overall mortality with each episode of VH
remains around 15% to 25% at six weeks. Such risk is much
higher in patients who develop VH in addition to other
decompensation (over 80% at ﬁve-years) than in those pre-
senting with VH as an isolated decompensating event (20%
at ﬁve-years).
170,171 Mortality risk is particularly high when
VH is associated with AKI and/or concomitant bacterial infec-
tions.
172 Without secondary prophylaxis, rebleeding occurs in
approximately 60% to 70% of patients, usually within one to
two years of the index haemorrhagic event. 173 Although
increasing efforts are performed to test non-invasively for
the presence of gastro-oesophageal varices, these efforts lar-
gely remain restricted to compensated cirrhosis.
167 Given
the high prevalence of ‘high-risk varices’ in decompensated
cirrhosis, oesophago-gastroduodenoscopy (EGD) should be
performed to detect the presence, size of varices and presence
of red wale marks.
168,169
Recommendations
/C15 Because they are deemed high risk, patients in whom
decompensation develops should have EGD performed
to screen for gastro-oesophageal varices, unless previ-
ously diagnosed and treated (II-2;1).
/C15 If EGD is performed, the presence, size and presence of
red wale marks should be reported (II-2;1).
/C15 In patients without varices on screening EGD in whom
the aetiological factor persists and/or the state of decom-
pensation continues, screening EGD should be repeated
every year. In the remaining patients the screening could
be prolonged, but the exact interval is unclear and more
data is required (III;2).
Prevention and treatment of variceal haemorrhage
Considering the high-risk of death when VH occurs in patients
with decompensated cirrhosis, implementation of strategies to
adequately treat VH and to prevent (re)bleeding and death
should be actively pursued in patients with decompensated cir-
rhosis. It should be noted that the current recommendations
will concentrate on decompensated patients given the focus of
these CPGs.
Primary and secondary prophylaxis of VH in decompensated
patients
The Baveno VI
168 and American Association for the Study of
Liver Diseases (AASLD) 169 guidelines primarily recommend
NSBBs for primary prophylaxis of VH in patients with cirrhosis
who have high-risk varices and also, combined with endoscopic
band ligation (EBL), for secondary prophylaxis of VH. Both
NSBBs and EBL have shown to be equally effective in preventing
ﬁrst bleeding in patients with high-risk varices. The choice
between options depends on factors such as patient preference,
contraindications or adverse events. Although numerically EBL
induces less side effects, it has been associated with more sev-
ere and potentially life-threatening complications, resulting
from bleeding EBL-ulcers. Moreover, EBL does not impact on
portal hypertension. Thus, it does not reduce/prevent other
complications and surveillance endoscopies are required to
detect variceal recurrence, supporting overall primary prefer-
ence for NSBBs.
174,175 For prevention of rebleeding (secondary
prophylaxis), combined therapy with NSBBs plus EBL is recom-
mended because combination therapy signiﬁcantly decreases
the probability of rebleeding compared to monotherapy using
either EBL or drug therapy. NSBBs are the cornerstone of com-
bined therapy because a meta-analysis shows an improvement
in survival with the addition of NSBBs (± nitrates) to EBL, while
the addition of EBL to NSBBs (± nitrates) has no effect on mor-
tality.
176 Recent RCTs indicate that guiding therapy according
to the HVPG response to NSBBs can be valuable in this high-risk
setting.91,177 HVPG-guided therapy may improve the outcomes
achieved with current ﬁrst-line therapy combining NSBBs and
EBL,91 and may achieve a similar survival as covered TIPS, which
is the most effective therapy in terms of preventing bleeding. 177
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 13
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Accordingly, HVPG-guided therapy can be used when available.
However, this approach has relevant drawbacks such as inva-
siveness and limited availability and, therefore, cannot be
widely recommended. NSBBs, such as propranolol and nadolol,
act on portal hypertension because non-selective beta-blockade
reduces cardiac output and splanchnic blood ﬂow while the
unopposed effect of alpha-1 adrenergic receptors leads to
splanchnic vasoconstriction, thus reducing portal pressure and
its consequential complications. Nonetheless, haemodynamic
response rates to NSBBs are modest: approximately 46% of cases
according to meta-analyses,
178,179 endorsing the overall search
for novel therapeutic options. Carvedilol, an NSBB with intrinsic
anti-alpha-1 receptor activity, has been associated with a
greater reduction in portal pressure than the traditional NSBBs
and has therefore become a valuable alternative.
180 Its beneﬁ-
cial action on alpha-1 receptors reduces both porto-collateral
and intrahepatic resistance, however, this is at the cost of more
profound effects on systemic arterial pressure, particularly in
decompensated patients. The problem with all the recommen-
dations mentioned so far is that they are based on high quality
RCTs that usually excluded patients with more advanced cirrho-
sis, while major controversy has arisen in recent years regarding
the use and safety of NSBBs in patients with advanced disease,
particularly in those with refractory ascites and/or SBP. The dis-
cussion was initiated by the Clichy group,
181 who reported poor
survival and increased risk of PPCD among patients with refrac-
tory ascites on NSBB therapy. The mechanism underlying these
ﬁndings was thought to relate to further induction of systemic
arterial hypotension and exhaustion of cardiac reserve, in light
of the progressive hyperdynamic circulation typically associated
with end-stage disease. As a result, end-organ perfusion
becomes critical and sets off a multitude of complications, like
HRS. Therefore, ‘‘the window hypothesis” was proposed which
suggested refractory ascites as a critical juncture where the pro-
tective effects of NSBBs may cease and a detrimental impact
may begin.
182 However, this hypothesis was challenged by
opposing reports suggesting protective effects with NSBBs even
in decompensated patients. 183–186 Illustratively, a recent post
hoc analysis of three RCTs where vaptans and NSBBs were co-
administered to patients with ascites showed that NSBBs did
not increase mortality. 183 On the contrary, during follow-up,
29% of initial NSBB users stopped taking NSBBs, inducing a
marked rise in mortality and coinciding with variceal bleeding,
bacterial infection and/or development of HRS.
183 Non-haemo-
dynamic effects of NSBBs, like reduction of intestinal permeabil-
ity, inﬂammation and BT, are considered to contribute to the
beneﬁcial effect, particularly in this advanced stage.
187–189
Whether NSBBs are detrimental in some patients with advanced
cirrhosis should be clariﬁed by future studies (ideally RCTs), as
well as the optimal drug-schedule in such stages. Meanwhile
some considerations could be made regarding dosing, type of
NSBB and titration.
168,184,185,190 Firstly, dosing of NSBBs was
suggested as a potential determinant according to a Danish
study in which low propranolol doses (<160 mg/day) were asso-
ciated with reduced mortality after experiencing an SBP
compared to higher doses.
184,190 Secondly, not all NSBBs proved
equal. Carvedilol, which exhibits additional vasodilatory
anti-alfa-1-adrenergic activity, might be deleterious in decom-
pensated patients as it is more likely to cause a systemic
haemodynamic depressive effect and may be best avoided or
very closely monitored.
185 Thirdly, the concept of titration of
NSBBs to a target heart rate of 50–55 bpm might be challenged
in decompensated patients given that, in parallel to the progres-
sion of liver disease, the hyperdynamic state evolves similarly,
which may lead to treatment of the most vulnerable patients
paradoxically with higher, and potentially hazardous, doses.
Therefore, the use of NSBBs should be based on a critical risk/ben-
eﬁt evaluation in patients with refractory ascites and signs of sys-
temic circulatory dysfunction.
168,191 Parameters such as severe
hyponatraemia,191 low mean arterial pressure 38 or cardiac out-
put,192 and increasing SCr 193 identify more vulnerable patients
among those with decompensated cirrhosis, in whom a dose
reduction or temporal discontinuation of NSBB treatment should
be considered. The recent BAVENO VI consensus168 proposed that
in patients with refractory ascites and (i) systolic blood pressure
<90 mmHg, or (ii) SCr >1.5 mg/dl, or (iii) hyponatraemia <130
mmol/L, the NSBB dose should be reduced or even temporarily
discontinued. Abrupt interruption of beta-blockers for a mean
of three to six days was recently found to be associated with nei-
ther an apparent increase in the risk of variceal bleeding nor with
a haemodynamic rebound.
194 If upon rechallenge, NSBB intoler-
ance occurs, EBL should be considered as an alternative in primary
prophylaxis.168 In the setting of refractory ascites and secondary
prophylaxis, covered TIPS placement may be considered if the
patient is an appropriate candidate.
111,168
Recommendations
/C15 Primary prophylaxis must be initiated upon detection of
‘‘high-risk varices” ( i.e. small varices with red signs,
medium or large varices irrespective of Child-Pugh clas-
siﬁcation or small varices in Child-Pugh C patients)
because of increased risk of VH (I;1).
/C15 Patients with small varices with red wale marks or
Child-Pugh C should be treated with NSBBs (III;1).
/C15 Patients with medium-large varices should be treated
with either NSBBs or EBL (I;1). The choice of treatment
can be based on local resources and expertise, patient
preference, contraindications and adverse events (III;2).
NSBBs could be preferred because in addition to lower-
ing portal pressure, they also exert other potential bene-
ﬁcial effects (II-2;2).
/C15 Although ascites is not a contraindication for NSBBs, cau-
tion should be exercised in cases of severe or refractory
ascites (I;1). High doses of NSBB should be avoided
(II-2;1). The use of carvedilol can not be recommended
at present (I;2).
/C15 In patients with progressive hypotension (systolic BP
<90 mmHg), or in patients who develop an acute inter-
current conditions such as bleeding, sepsis, SBP or AKI,
NSBBs should be discontinued (III,1). After recovery,
reinstatement of NSBBs can be attempted (III,2). When
NSBB intolerance or contraindications persist, patients
bleeding risk should be managed by expeditious EBL
(III,1).
Clinical Practice Guidelines
14 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Recommendations
/C15 Combination therapy of NSBBs + EBL is recommended
since it reduces the risk of rebleeding compared with
monotherapy (I,1).
/C15 Similar recommendations as for primary prophylaxis can
be made with respect to NSBB usage in patients with
ascites or developing an acute inter-current condition
(III,2).
/C15 If the patient continues to be intolerant to NSBB, covered
TIPS placement is recommended provided that there are
no absolute contraindication (cf. criteria in ascites sec-
tion) (III,1).
Variceal haemorrhage
Acute GI bleeding in cirrhosis, either because of gastro-oesopha-
geal varices or non-variceal lesions, is a medical emergency
with a high incidence of complications and high mortality and
therefore requires intensive care ( Fig. 2). Acute variceal haemor-
rhage (AVH) must be suspected in any cirrhotic patient present-
ing with upper acute GI bleeding and treatment should be
started as soon as bleeding is clinically conﬁrmed, regardless
the lack of conﬁrmation by upper endoscopy.
195 Initial therapy
should be directed at restoring volaemia. 196 Vasoactive drug
therapy197,198 and antibiotic prophylaxis 195,196 should be initi-
ated as soon as AVH is suspected. Goals of therapy in AVH
include the control of bleeding, as well as the prevention of
early recurrence and the prevention of six-week mortality,
which is considered the main treatment outcome by consen-
sus.
168,199 Blood volume restitution should be initiated
promptly to restore and maintain haemodynamic stability to
ensure tissue perfusion and oxygen delivery. To facilitate resus-
citation at least two catheters should be placed, large enough to
allow rapid volume expansion, which can usually be done with
crystalloids.
196 No beneﬁt has been demonstrated with the use
of colloids compared to crystalloids. 200 Red blood cells are used
to improve oxygen delivery to tissues in case of severe anaemia.
A restrictive transfusion strategy is adequate in most patients
with acute GI bleeding, with a haemoglobin threshold for
transfusion of 7 g/dl and a target range after transfusion of
7 to 9 g/dl.
201 The threshold for transfusion may be higher in
patients with massive haemorrhage or in those with underlying
conditions that preclude an adequate physiological response to
acute anaemia. Recommendations regarding management of
coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia cannot be made based on
currently available data.
168,169,199
As mentioned above vasoactive drug therapy should be initi-
ated as soon as AVH is suspected. Starting vasoactive drugs
before endoscopy decreases the incidence of active bleeding dur-
ing endoscopy and facilitates endoscopic therapy, improving the
control of bleeding, and potentially survival.
197,198 Either terli-
pressin, somatostatin or octreotide are accepted drugs with pro-
ven efﬁcacy. 202 All these drugs require i.v administration. The
recommended dose of terlipressin is 2 mg/4 h during the ﬁrst
48 h, followed by 1 mg/4 h thereafter. The recommended dose
of somatostatin is a continuous infusion of 250 lg/h (that can
be increased up to 500 lg/h) with an initial bolus of 250 lg.
The recommended dose of octreotide is a continuous infusion
of 50 lg/h with an initial bolus of 50 lg. A bolus of somatostatin
Acute gastrointestinal bleeding + portal hypertension
Immediate start of drug therapy
(somatostatin/terlipressin)
Antibiotic prophylaxis
(ceftriaxone or norfloxacine)
Control
(~85% of cases)
Further bleeding
(~15% of cases)
Rescue with TIPSConsider early TIPS
in high-risk
+ maintain vasoactive drug therapy 3-5 days
and antibiotic prophylaxis (ceftriaxone or norfloxacine )
Balloon tamponade or esophageal stenting
if masive bleeding
Early diagnostic endoscopy (<12 h)
Confirm variceal bleeding
Endoscopic therapy (band ligation )
ENDOSCOPY
ENDOSCOPY
Initial assesment (history, physical & blood exam, cultures)
& resuscitation
Airway
Breathing
Circulation
- Volume replacement with crystalloids 
(or colloids) 
- Restrictive transfusion 
Hb threshold of 7 g/dl & target of 7- 9 g/dl  
+
Fig. 2. Algorithm for the management of acute gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with cirrhosis (adapted from Ref. 168). TIPS, transjugular
portosystemic shunts.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 15
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

or octreotide can be given again if bleeding is ongoing. Once AVH
is conﬁrmed, vasoactive drug therapy should be administered
for ﬁve days to avoid early rebleeding.
168,169 Shorter administra-
tion of vasoactive drugs (48–72 h) can be considered in less sev-
ere episodes although more data are required. 203 Once blood
volume restitution has been initiated and haemodynamic stabil-
ity has been achieved, upper endoscopy should be performed, as
soon as possible within the ﬁrst 12 h after admission, to ascer-
tain the cause of haemorrhage (up to 30% of cirrhotic patients
bleed from non-variceal causes) and to provide endoscopic ther-
apy if indicated.
168,169 Erythromycin should be considered
before emergency endoscopy (250 mg i.v., 30–120 min before)
to facilitate the procedure by improving visibility, in the absence
of contraindications (QT prolongation).
204 When AVH is con-
ﬁrmed by endoscopy, EBL should be performed within the same
procedure. EBL is more effective than sclerotherapy to control
bleeding, with fewer adverse effects, and may even improve sur-
vival.
196 Sclerotherapy can be used when ligation is not feasible.
The combination of endoscopic therapy and vasoactive drugs is
more effective than the isolated use of either of these options
alone,
205,206 because it combines the local haemostatic effect
on the varices induced by endoscopic treatment and the portal
hypotensive effect achieved with drugs. This combination is cur-
rently considered the standard of care in AVH.
168,169 Cyanoacry-
late injection and EBL are accepted options for endoscopic
therapy in patients bleeding from gastric (cardiofundal) varices
as both therapies are equally effective.
207 However, EBL should
only be performed on small gastric varices in which the com-
plete vessel can be suctioned into the ligation device. Other
endoscopic therapies, such as the endoscopic ultrasound–guided
insertion of coils and/or cyanoacrylate, are available for fundal
varices. Prevention of complications should run simultaneously
to haemostatic therapies from admission of patients with cirrho-
sis and acute GI bleeding. The main complications, whatever the
cause of bleeding, include bacterial infections (such as aspiration
pneumonia or SBP), hepatic encephalopathy and deterioration of
renal function. Bacterial infections are observed in more than
50% of patients and may already be present at the time of bleed-
ing (20%) acting as a precipitating event.
196 Moreover, the pres-
ence of bacterial infection is an independent predictor of failure
to control bleeding and death. 208 Antibiotic prophylaxis is rec-
ommended because it reduces the incidence of infections and
improves control of bleeding and survival.
199,208 Ceftriaxone (1
g/24 h) for up to seven days, is the ﬁrst choice in patients with
advanced cirrhosis, in those on quinolone prophylaxis and in
hospital settings with high prevalence of quinolone-resistant
bacterial infections.
209,210 Oral quinolones (norﬂoxacin 400 mg
b.i.d) can be used in the remaining patients. These recommenda-
tions are however best evaluated and cross-checked from the
perspective of local resistance patterns. Renal function should
be preserved by the adequate replacement of ﬂuids and elec-
trolytes.
211 Nephrotoxic drugs (such as aminoglycosides and
non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs [NSAIDs]) as well as
LVP, beta-blockers, vasodilators and other hypotensive drugs
should be avoided during the course of AVH. Oral non-absorb-
able disaccharides may be used to prevent the development of
hepatic encephalopathy,
169 although more studies are needed.
When encephalopathy develops, lactulose or lactitol should be
used.
168,169 Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) have not shown efﬁ-
cacy for the management of AVH. However, a short course ther-
apy with PPI after EBL may reduce the size of post-banding
ulcers.
212 Despite therapy with vasoactive drugs plus EBL and
prophylactic antibiotics, up to 10–15% of patients with AVH have
persistent bleeding or early rebleeding. 195,199 In such cases, TIPS
should be considered as the rescue therapy of choice. 168,169
When TIPS is not feasible or in case of modest rebleeding, a sec-
ond endoscopic therapy may be attempted while vasoactive
drugs can also be optimised, by doubling the dose of somato-
statin and/or changing to terlipressin if not used previously. Bal-
loon tamponade should be used in case of massive bleeding, as a
temporary ‘‘bridge” until deﬁnitive treatment can be instituted
and for a maximum of 24 h, preferably under intensive care facil-
ities.
168,169 Because of the high risk of aspiration pneumonia,
tamponade should be preceded by prophylactic orotracheal
intubation in comatose or encephalopathic patients. Removable,
covered and self-expanding oesophageal stents are an alterna-
tive to balloon tamponade, and may have lower rates of serious
adverse events.
213 RCTs suggest that in high-risk patients, early
(preemptive) PTFE-coated TIPS placed within 72 h (ideally in less
than 24 h) may result in better permanent control of bleeding
and may improve survival.214,215 However, these studies had rel-
evant drawbacks such as the inclusion of a highly selected pop-
ulation because of strict exclusion criteria, while observational
studies have not conﬁrmed the effect on survival. 216,217 The
use of Child-Pugh class B plus active bleeding at endoscopy as
a criterion to select high-risk patients has also been criticised. 218
It has also been suggested that a recalibrated MELD score may
better identify patients at high risk than other scores. 219 At pre-
sent, early TIPS should be considered in patients with Child-Pugh
class C, with a score <14. However, future studies should clarify
which criteria may be preferred to select high-risk patients
before a wide implementation of early TIPS. Future studies
should also clarify whether an adequate stratiﬁcation of risk in
patients with AVH can optimise therapy.
Recommendations
/C15 Acute GI bleeding, both due to gastro-oesophageal
varices or to non-variceal lesions, carries a high inci-
dence of complications and mortality in decompensated
cirrhosis and therefore requires close monitoring
(II-2;1).
/C15 Volume replacement should be initiated promptly to
restore and maintain haemodynamic stability (III;1).
Either colloids and/or crystalloids should be used
(III;1). Starch should not be used for volume replace-
ment (I;1).
/C15 A restrictive transfusion strategy is recommended in
most patients with a haemoglobin threshold for transfu-
sion of 7 g/dl and a target range of 7–9 g/dl (I;1).
/C15 Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in cirrhotic
patients with acute GI bleeding because it reduces the
incidence of infections and improves control of bleeding
and survival. Treatment should be initiated on presenta-
tion of bleeding and continued for up to seven days (I;1).
Ceftriaxone (1 g/24 h) is the ﬁrst choice in patients with
decompensated cirrhosis, those already on quinolone
prophylaxis, and in hospital settings with high preva-
lence of quinolone-resistant bacterial infections. Oral
quinolones (norﬂoxacin 400 mg b.i.d) should be used in
the remaining patients (I;1).
Clinical Practice Guidelines
16 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Recommendations
/C15 Vasoactive drug therapy should be initiated as soon as
acute variceal bleeding is suspected, and before endo-
scopy. Terlipressin, somatostatin or octreotide are
accepted options. In patients with acute variceal bleed-
ing drug therapy should be administered for three to ﬁve
days (I;1).
/C15 Gastroscopy should be performed within the ﬁrst 12 h
after admission once haemodynamic stability has been
achieved, to ascertain the cause of haemorrhage and to
provide endoscopic therapy (II-2;1).
/C15 When acute variceal bleeding is conﬁrmed by endo-
scopy, variceal ligation should be performed within the
same procedure (I;1).
/C15 In the absence of contraindications (QT prolongation)
pre-endoscopy erythromycin (250 mg i.v., 30–120 min
before) can be used to facilitate the procedure (I;2).
/C15 The combination of vasoactive drugs and ligation is rec-
ommended as the ﬁrst therapeutic option in acute vari-
ceal bleeding (I;1).
/C15 Early pre-emptive covered TIPS (placed within 24–72 h)
can be suggested in selected high-risk patients, such as
those with Child class C with score <14 (I;2). However,
the criteria for high-risk patients, particularly Child B
with active bleeding, remains debatable and needs fur-
ther study.
Recommendations
/C15 Up to 10–15% of patients have persistent bleeding or
early rebleeding despite treatment with vasoactive
drugs plus variceal ligation, and prophylactic antibiotics.
TIPS should be used as the rescue therapy of choice in
such cases (I;1).
/C15 Balloon tamponade should be used in case of uncon-
trolled bleeding, but with pre-requisite of expertise
and as a temporary ‘‘bridge” until deﬁnitive treatment
can be instituted and for a maximum of 24 h (III;1).
Removable, covered and self-expanding oesophageal
stents can be used as alternative to balloon tamponade
(I;2).
/C15 In the context of bleeding, where encephalopathy is
commonly encountered, prophylactic lactulose may be
used to prevent encephalopathy, but further studies
are needed (I;2).
/C15 Beta-blockers and vasodilators should be avoided during
the acute bleeding episode (III,1).
Portal hypertension gastropathy and intestinopathy
Portal hypertension gastropathy (PHG) often presents in decom-
pensated patients given that its natural history is signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by the severity of liver disease and portal hyperten-
sion. The presence of oesophageal varices and a Child-Pugh class
B or C at enrollment were found to predict the incidence of PHG,
which might range between 30 and 45%.
220,221 The incidence
and severity of PHG may increase following endoscopic treat-
ment for oesophageal varices.
222 Portal hypertension should
be distinguished from gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE or
watermelon stomach), which have different underlying
pathophysiologies and different therapeutic implications. The
diagnosis of PHG is made by endoscopy and typically shows a
snake-skin mosaic pattern (mild subtype), which may have
superimposed red signs (severe PHG) and is most commonly
located in the proximal stomach (fundus and body) whereas
GAVE is characterised by the presence of red spots without a
background mosaic pattern, typically located in the gastric
antrum.
170 Similar endoscopical lesions, as documented in
PHG, may be observed in other areas of the GI tract where they
have been termed portal hypertensive duodenopathy, portal
hypertensive enteropathy or portal hypertensive colopathy
depending on the location of the lesions.
223 PHG and every form
of enteropathy might be clinically important because they are
sometimes responsible for insidious blood loss (chronic iron
deﬁcient anaemia) and in exceptional cases even overt acute
bleeding. When PHG is found as an incidental asymptomatic
ﬁnding without concomitant oesophageal or gastric varices, its
relevance is unclear and endoscopic follow-up or prophylactic
treatment is not recommended.
168 First-line therapy for chronic
haemorrhage from PHG is an NSBB. 168,224,225 The same consid-
erations regarding the use of NSBBs in decompensated patients
should be made as for gastro-oesophageal varices, except that
there is no alternative, endoscopic, standard intervention avail-
able for PHG. In addition, iron supplementation should be pro-
vided.
168,226 In patients with medically refractory PHG and
compensated cirrhosis, TIPS has shown to improve the endo-
scopic appearance and decrease the transfusion requirement.
227
In case of acute PHG bleeding, albeit rare, small and uncon-
trolled studies have suggested pharmacological intervention
with somatostatin-analogues or terlipressin because of their
portal hypotensive effects and reduction in gastric blood
ﬂow.
226,228 In addition, similar measures are to be taken as for
AVH (antibiotic prophylaxis, restrictive transfusion policy). For
portal hypertension intestinopathy, there is no established stan-
dard of treatment and an approach analogous to that for PHG is
suggested. As for any given complication, LT should be consid-
ered as part of the management of decompensated patients.
Recommendations
/C15 NSBB and iron supplementation and/or blood transfu-
sion, when indicated, are recommended as ﬁrst-line
therapy for chronic haemorrhage from PHG is an (I;1).
/C15 In patients with transfusion-dependent PHG in whom
NSBBs fail or are not tolerated, covered TIPS placement
may be used provided the patient has no contraindica-
tion for TIPS (II-3;2).
/C15 Acute PHG bleeding may be treated with somatostatin-
analogues or terlipressin but substantiating data are lim-
ited (I;2).
Gastric varices
The Sarin classiﬁcation is most commonly used for risk stratiﬁ-
cation and management of gastric varices ( Table 6 ).
229 Gastric
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 17
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

varices are present in about 20% of patients with cirrhosis. Gas-
tro-oesophageal varices type 1, which are the most common
(75% of gastric varices), are oesophageal varices extending
below the cardia into the lesser curvature and, in the absence
of speciﬁc studies, are commonly managed following guidelines
for oesophageal varices.
168 Cardiofundal varices (gastro-oeso-
phageal varices type 2 & isolated gastric varices type 1) bleed
less frequently. However, haemorrhage from cardiofundal
varices is often more severe, more difﬁcult to control and shows
a higher risk of recurrent bleeding and mortality (up to 45%)
compared to oesophageal varices.
229 Cardiofundal varices are
more frequent in patients with splanchnic venous thrombosis,
which should be investigated by imaging. The evidence to sup-
port recommendations for management of gastric VH is much
less robust than that for oesophageal varices. Regarding primary
prophylaxis of bleeding from gastric varices, a single ran-
domised trial suggested that cyanoacrylate injection may be
more effective than NSBBs in preventing ﬁrst bleeding in
patients with large cardiofundal varices, although survival was
similar.
230 Therefore, the last BAVENO consensus concluded
that further studies are needed to evaluate the risk/beneﬁt ratio
of using cyanoacrylate in this setting before a formal recom-
mendation can be made and meanwhile propose NSBBs as the
primary approach.
168 Acute gastric VH is medically treated like
bleeding oesophageal varices. However, injection therapy with
cyanoacrylate (‘glue’) may be the preferable option for endo-
scopic haemostasis.
231 Although equally effective as EBL in ini-
tial haemostasis, the rebleeding rate is signiﬁcantly lower. 232
TIPS, with or without additional embolisation of collaterals, is
equally effective in gastric and oesophageal VH for control of
acute bleeding events and prevention of rebleeding.
233 In case
of massive bleeding, balloon tamponade with the Linton-Nach-
las tube may serve as a bridge to other treatments. Regarding
secondary prophylaxis, in one RCT repeated cyanoacrylate
injection was superior to NSBBs to prevent rebleeding from car-
diofundal varices,
232 while the addition of NSBBs to cyanoacry-
late did not improve the outcomes achieved with glue alone in
another RCT. 234 Another trial comparing TIPS to glue injection
showed that TIPS proved more effective in preventing rebleed-
ing from gastric varices, with similar survival and frequency of
complications.
235 The option of early TIPS should be strongly
considered, particularly in cardiofundal varices given the high
rebleeding rate, provided that patient is an appropriate
candidate for such a procedure. Alternatively, balloon-occluded
retrograde transvenous obliteration (BRTO) can be considered.
This interventional radiological procedure enables treatment
of fundal varices associated with a large gastro/splenorenal
collaterals, which has the theoretical advantage over TIPS of
not diverting portal blood inﬂow from the liver. However, no
randomised trials are available comparing BRTO with other
therapies. Several variations of this technique are available,
such as balloon-occluded antegrade transvenous obliteration
(BATO).
236
Recommendations
/C15 NSBBs are suggested for primary prevention of VH from
gastro-oesophageal varices type 2 or isolated gastric
varices type 1 (III;2).
/C15 Primary prevention for gastro-oesophageal varices type
1 follow the recommendations of oesophageal varices
(III;2).
/C15 Acute gastric VH should be treated medically, like oeso-
phageal VH (I;1). Cyanoacrylate is the recommended
endoscopic haemostatic treatment for cardiofundal
varices (gastro-oesophageal varices type 2 or isolated
gastric varices type 1) (I;2).
/C15 TIPS with potential embolisation efﬁciently controls
bleeding and prevents rebleeding in fundal VH (gastro-
oesophageal varices type 2 or isolated gastric varices
type 1) and should be considered in appropriate candi-
dates (II-2;1).
/C15 Selective embolisation (BRTO/BATO) may also be used to
treat bleeding from fundal varices associated with large
gastro/splenorenal collaterals, although more data is
required (III;2).
Bacterial infections
The risk of bacterial infection in cirrhosis is caused by multiple
factors that include liver dysfunction, portosystemic shunting,
gut dysbiosis, increased BT, cirrhosis-associated immune dys-
function,237,238 and genetic factors This immune defect facili-
tates BT, induced by increased intestinal permeability and gut
bacterial overgrowth observed in cirrhosis. 239 Genetic immune
defects can contribute to the high risk of bacterial infections
in cirrhosis, particularly SBP. Cirrhotic patients carrying NOD2
variants associated with impaired recognition of the bacterial
product muramyl dipeptide have a higher risk of SBP and a
reduced survival time.
240
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Deﬁnition
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis has been deﬁned as a bacterial
infection of ascitic ﬂuid without any intra-abdominal surgically
treatable source of infection. SBP is very common in patients
with cirrhosis and ascites.
241,242 When ﬁrst described, its mor-
tality exceeded 90% but it has been reduced to approximately
20% with early diagnosis and treatment. 243
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of SBP is based on diagnostic paracentesis. 33,244
All patients with cirrhosis and ascites are at risk of SBP and
the prevalence of SBP in outpatients is 1.5–3.5% and /C24 10% in
hospitalised patients. 245 Half the episodes of SBP are present
at the time of hospital admission while the rest are acquired
during hospitalisation.
33 Patients with SBP may have one of
the following: 33 i) local symptoms and/or signs of peritonitis:
Table 6 . Classiﬁcation, prevalence and risk of bleeding of gastric varices.
Type Deﬁnition Relative
frequency
Overall bleeding
risk without
treatment
GOV 1 OV extending below cardia
into lesser curvature
70% 28%
GOV 2 OV extending below cardia
into fundus
21% 55%
IGV 1 Isolated varices in the
fundus
7% 78%
IGV 2 Isolated varices else in the
stomach
2% 9%
GOV, gastro-oesophageal varices; IGV, isolated gastric varices; OV, oesophageal
varices.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
18 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

abdominal pain, abdominal tenderness, vomiting, diarrhoea,
ileus; ii) signs of systemic inﬂammation: hyper or hypothermia,
chills, altered white blood cell count, tachycardia, and/or
tachypnoea; iii) worsening of liver function; iv) hepatic
encephalopathy; v) shock; vi) renal failure; and, vii) GI bleeding.
However, it is important to point out that SBP may be asymp-
tomatic, particularly in outpatients.
245 In an observational study
in 239 patients with SBP, delayed diagnostic paracenteseis (>12
h after admission) was associated with a 2.7-fold increase in
mortality.
246 Peritoneal infection causes an inﬂammatory reac-
tion resulting in an increased number of neutrophils in ascitic
ﬂuid. Despite the use of sensitive methods, ascites culture is
negative in as many as 60% of patients with clinical manifesta-
tions suggestive of SBP and increased ascites neutrophil count.
33
The gold standard for ascitic neutrophil count is manual micro-
scopy, but it is labour intensive and associated with interob-
server variability, time and costs. In most places this has been
substituted with automated counts based on ﬂow cytometry
for counting and differentiating cells. This technique has been
documented to have high linearity with manual microscopy
and thus sensitivity and speciﬁcity close to 100%.
247,248 The
greatest sensitivity for the diagnosis of SBP is reached with a
cut-off neutrophil count of 250/mm
3, although the greatest
speciﬁcity is reached with a cut-off of 500 neutrophils/mm 3.33
The use of reagent strips cannot be recommended for the rapid
diagnosis of SBP. 249 Although the presence of bacterial DNA in
plasma and/or ascites is associated with an impairment of circu-
latory function, 250 there are not enough data to support its use
in clinical practice.251 Ascites culture is essential to guide antibi-
otic therapy. Patients with an ascitic ﬂuid neutrophil count ≥250
cells/mm3 and negative culture have culture-negative SBP. 252
Their clinical presentation is like that of patients with culture-
positive SBP and should be treated in a similar manner. Some
patients have ‘bacterascites’ in which cultures are positive but
there is normal ascitic neutrophil count (<250/mm 3).33 In some
patients bacterascites is the result of secondary bacterial coloni-
sation of ascites from an extraperitoneal infection. These
patients usually have general symptoms and signs of infection.
In other patients, bacterascites is due to the spontaneous coloni-
sation of ascites, and can either be clinically asymptomatic or
lead to abdominal pain or fever. While in some patients, partic-
ularly in those who are asymptomatic, bacterascites represents
a transient and spontaneously reversible colonisation of ascites,
in other patients, mainly those who are symptomatic, bac-
terascites may represent the ﬁrst step in the development of
SBP.
33 Spontaneous fungal peritonitis is a rare, less recognised
and studied complication, occurring in <5% of cases, but obser-
vational data suggest a worse prognosis. 253
Spontaneous bacterial pleural empyema
Infection of a pre-existing hydrothorax, known as spontaneous
bacterial pleural empyema, is uncommon. One study followed
3,390 patients with cirrhosis for four years and observed it in
2.4% of the overall population and 16% of patients with pre-
existing hydrothorax, with associated mortality of 38%.
254 The
diagnosis is based on pleural ﬂuid analysis obtained by diagnos-
tic thoracocentesis. In the largest observational study reported
so far, the diagnosis of spontaneous bacterial empyema was
established when the pleural ﬂuid analysis showed a positive
culture and more than 250 neutrophils/mm
3 or a negative cul-
ture and more than 500 neutrophils/mm 3, in the absence of lung
infection.255 Pleural ﬂuid culture in blood culture bottles was
positive in 75% of cases. 255 Spontaneous bacterial pleural
empyema was associated with SBP in /C24 50% of cases. 255
Secondary bacterial peritonitis
A small proportion ( /C24 5%) of patients with cirrhosis may develop
peritonitis due to perforation or inﬂammation of an intra-
abdominal organ, a condition known as secondary bacterial
peritonitis.
256 The differentiation of this condition from SBP is
important. Secondary bacterial peritonitis should be suspected
in patients who have localised abdominal symptoms or signs,
presence of multiple organisms on ascitic culture, very high
ascitic neutrophil count and/or high ascitic protein concentra-
tion, or in those patients with an inadequate response to ther-
apy.
256 Patients with suspected secondary bacterial peritonitis
should undergo prompt computed tomography (CT) scanning
and early consideration for surgery.
Recommendations
/C15 A diagnostic paracentesis should be carried out in all
patients with cirrhosis and ascites without delay at hos-
pital admission to rule out SBP. A diagnostic paracentesis
should also be performed in patients with GI bleeding,
shock, fever or other signs of systemic inﬂammation, GI
symptoms, as well as in patients with worsening liver
and/or renal function, and hepatic encephalopathy
(II-2;1).
/C15 The diagnosis of SBP is based on neutrophil count in asci-
tic ﬂuid of >250/mm
3 (II-2;1). Neutrophil count is deter-
mined by microscopy, but can be substituted with a ﬂow
cytometry based automated count. The use of reagent
strips has no clear evidence to support it in routine prac-
tice (II-2;1).
/C15 Although ascitic ﬂuid culture positivity is not a pre-
requisite for the diagnosis of SBP, culture should be
performed in order to guide antibiotic therapy (II-2;1).
/C15 Blood cultures should be performed in all patients with
suspected SBP before starting antibiotic treatment(II-2;1).
/C15 Patients with bacterascites (neutrophil count less than
250/mm
3 but positive bacterial culture) exhibiting signs
of systemic inﬂammation or infection should be treated
with antibiotics (II-2;1). Otherwise, the patient should
undergo a second paracentesis. If the culture results
come back positive again, regardless of the neutrophil
count, the patient should be treated (III;1).
/C15 The diagnosis of spontaneous bacterial pleural empyema
should be based on positive pleural ﬂuid culture and
increased neutrophil count of >250/mm
3 or negative
pleural ﬂuid culture and a neutrophil count of >500/
mm
3 in the absence of pneumonia (II-2;1).
/C15 Secondary bacterial peritonitis should be suspected in
case of multiple organisms on ascitic culture, very high
ascitic neutrophil count and/or high ascitic protein con-
centration, or in those patients with an inadequate
response to therapy. Patients with suspected secondary
bacterial peritonitis should undergo prompt CT scanning
and early considerations for surgery (III,1).
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 19
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Management of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Empirical antibiotic therapy . Empirical antibiotic therapy must
be initiated immediately after the diagnosis of SBP. 33 Potentially
nephrotoxic antibiotics ( i.e., aminoglycosides) should not be
used as empirical therapy. 76 In the 1990 s, cefotaxime, a third-
generation cephalosporin, was extensively investigated in
patients with SBP because at that time it covered most causative
organisms and because of its high ascitic ﬂuid concentrations
during therapy.
1,33 Infection resolution was obtained in 77 to
98% of patients. A dose of 4 g/day is as effective as a dose of 8
g/day.
257 A ﬁve-day therapy is as effective as a 10-day treat-
ment.258 Alternatively, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, ﬁrst given i.
v. then orally, has similar results with respect to SBP resolution
and mortality as cefotaxime
259 and at a much lower cost. How-
ever, there is only one comparative study with a small sample
size and results should be conﬁrmed in larger trials. In addition,
some concern exists regarding amoxicillin/clavulanic acid as its
use is associated with a high rate of drug induced liver injury
(DILI).
260 Administration of i.v. ciproﬂoxacin for seven days
results in a similar SBP resolution rate and hospital survival as
cefotaxime, but at a signiﬁcantly higher cost.
261 However,
switch therapy ( i.e., use of i.v. antibiotic initially, followed by
oral step-down administration) with ciproﬂoxacin is more
cost-effective than i.v. ceftazidime.
262 Oral oﬂoxacin has shown
similar results as i.v. cefotaxime in uncomplicated SBP, without
renal failure, hepatic encephalopathy, GI bleeding, ileus, or
shock.
263 However, the spread of resistant bacteria in the
healthcare environment during the last two decades has led to
an alarming increase in the number of infections caused by
multi-drug resistant organisms (MDROs)
264 that are deﬁned
by an acquired non-susceptibility to at least one agent in three
or more antimicrobial categories. 265 Patients with advanced cir-
rhosis are highly susceptible to the development of infections
caused by MDROs, because they require repeated hospitalisa-
tions, are often submitted toinvasive procedures and are fre-
quently exposed to antibiotics, either as prophylaxis or as
treatment. All these factors are well kown risk factors for the
development of infections sustained by MDROs.
266 Bacterial
resistance increases four fold the risk of mortality of SBP. 267 In
particular, nosocomial SBP has been associated with multi-drug
resistance and poor outcomes. 266 The landscape of bacterial
resistance is continuously changing and challenging recommen-
dations for antibiotics. Thus, it is crucial to separate commu-
nity-acquired SBP from health care-associated and nosocomial
SBP
6,266–268 and to consider both the severity of infection and
the local resistance proﬁle in order to decide the empirical
antibiotic treatment of SBP. Piperacillin/tazobactam has been
recommended as the primary approach for health care and
nosocomial SBP in areas with low prevalence of infections sus-
tained by MDROs. On the contrary meropenem alone or/and
combined with glycopeptides or with daptomycin has been sug-
gested as the primary approach for health care-associated SBP
when severe, or in areas with high prevalence of MDROs, and
for nosocomial SBP in general.
6,266,268,269 Regarding the severity
of infection, it should be highlighted that, recently, the new cri-
teria for the deﬁnition of sepsis, namely qSOFA and Sepsis-3
270
have been validated in patients with cirrhosis and bacterial
infections, proving that they are more accurate than those
related to the systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome in
predicting hospital mortality.
271 Accordingly, a new algorithm
has been proposed for the application of qSOFA and Sepsis-3
in the management of cirrhotic patients ( Fig. 3 ). Some more
detailed recommendations on the empirical antibiotic treat-
ment of SBP based on the severity and the environment of the
infection as well as on local resistance proﬁles are provided
(Fig. 4 ). A randomised trial with 32 nosocomial episodes of
SBP, found meropenem plus daptomycin more effective
(86.7%) than ceftazidime (25%) to manage SBP, deﬁned as
>25% decrease of neutrophil count at 48 h and to <250/mm
3
at day seven. 243 If ascitic ﬂuid neutrophil count fails to decrease
to less than 25% of the pretreatment value after two days of
If baseline SOFA score available?
Apply sepsis-3 criteria
Poor outcome
Patient con need transfer to ICU
Yes
Positive Negative
No
Apply sepsis-3 criteria and qSOFA
Sepsis-3 and
qSOFA positive
Sepsis-3 and
qSOFA negative
Good outcome Sepsis-3 positive 
and qSOFA negative Good outcome
Grey zone
Monitoring SOFA 
score is required
Fig. 3. Algorithm for the application of qSOFA and Sepsis-3 criteria in patients with cirrhosis and bacterial infections (adapted form Ref. 271). ICU,
intensive care unit.
Community-acquired
SBP or SBE
Nosocomial 
SBP or SBE
§
SBP or SBE
Healthcare-associated 
SBP or SBE
§
AREA DEPENDENT:
Like nosocomial 
infections if high 
prevalence of MDRO
or sepsis   
Carbapenem alone or 
+ daptomycin, 
vancomycin or 
linezold# if high 
prevalence of MDR 
Gram+ bacteria or 
sepsis     
3rd generation 
cephalosporin or 
piperacillin-tazobactam
Fig. 4. Recommended empirical antibiotic treatment of SBP or SBE
(adapted from Ref. 6). SBE, spontaneous bacterial empyema; SBP, sponta-
neous bacterial peritonitis; MDRO, multidrug resistant organism.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
20 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

antibiotic treatment, there is a high likelihood of failure to
respond to therapy.33 This should raise the suspicion of an infec-
tion caused by bacteria resistant to antibiotic therapy, indicat-
ing the need for modiﬁcation of antibiotic treatment according
to in vitro sensitivity or on an empirical basis, or the presence
of ‘secondary peritonitis’. In this context, it should be high-
lighted that the progressive increase of the use of carbapenems
because of the worldwide pandemic of extended spectrum beta-
lactamases (ESBLs) producing Enterobacteriaceae has promoted
the emergence of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae. This
implies a potential shift from MDR bacteria to extensively drug
resistance (XDR) bacteria deﬁned by a non-susceptibility to at
least one agent in all but two or fewer antimicrobial categories
or to pandrug resistance (PDR) bacteria deﬁned by a non-sus-
ceptibility to all agents in all antimicrobial categories.
265 The
shift requires an active surveillance in patients at risk, in order
to identify patients who are colonised or infected by these
clones and prevent their dissemination. The shift may also seri-
ously affect the effectiveness of the broadest spectrum empiri-
cal antibiotic treatment among those previously
recommended for SBP and infections other than SBP. Carbapen-
emase-producing and carbapenem-resistant non-carbapene-
mase-producing Enterobacteriaceae can be treated with
tigecycline or with the combination of tigecycline at high doses
and a carbapenem in continuous infusion. Addition of i.v. col-
istin could be necessary in severe infections. Severe infections
caused by Pseudomonas aeuruginosa resistant to carbapenems
and quinolones usually require the combination of i.v.
amikacin/tobramycin or colistin plus a carbapenem/ceftazidime
(needed as synergic antibiotics despite antibiotic resistance).
Vancomycin resistant Enterococci should be treated with line-
zolid, daptomycin or tigecycline. All this means reintroducing
into clinical practice antibiotics known to be highly nephrotoxic
in patients with cirrhosis. It follows that serum levels of amino-
glycosides and vancomycin must be monitored closely in these
patients, to decrease the risk of renal failure. The shift from MDR
to XDR bacteria re-emphasises the interest of the pharmaceuti-
cal industry for the development of new antibiotics. Several new
glycopeptides such as oritavancin, new oxazolidinones such as
tedizolid phosphate, new cephalosporins, such as ceftaroline and
ceftobiprole and razupenem, a new carbapemen, display extended
activity against gram-positive bacteria including vancomycin-
resistant Enterococci. In contrast, few newly developed
antibiotics are active against gram-negative MDROs. Temocillin,
a derivative of ticarcillin, is effective against organisms
producing ESBLs. Among cephalosporin-betalactamase inhibitor
combinations, ceftazidime/avibactam and ceftolozane/tazobac-
tam represent further new alternatives to carbapenems for the
treatment of patients with infections sustained by ESBL
producing, carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae and Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa . However, there are currently no data
regarding the clinical use of these drugs in cirrhosis.
266
Recommendations
/C15 Empirical i.v. antibiotics should be started immediately
following the diagnosis of SBP (II-2;1).
/C15 Environment (nosocomial vs. community acquired), local
bacterial resistance proﬁles and severity of infection
should guide empirical antibiotic treatment (I;1).
/C15 Third-generation cephalosporins are recommended as
ﬁrst-line antibiotic treatment for community-acquired
SBP in countries with low rates of bacterial resistance
(I;1). In countries with high rates of bacterial resistance
piperacillin/tazobactam or carbapenem should be con-
sidered (II-2;1).
/C15 Healthcare associated and nosocomial SBP is more likely
to harbour resistance to antibiotics. Piperacillin/tazobac-
tam should be given in areas with low prevalence of
multi-drug resistance while carbapenem should be used
in areas with high prevalence of ESBL producing Enter-
obacteriaceae. Caarbapenem should be combined with
glycopeptides or daptomycin or linezolid in areas with
high prevalence of gram positive MDR bacteria (I;1).
/C15 Severe infections sustained by XDR bacteria may require
the use of antibiotics known to be highly nephrotoxic in
patients with cirrhosis, such as vancomycin or aminogly-
cosides. In these cases, patients’ plasma level should be
monitored in accordance with local policy thresholds
(III;1).
/C15 De-escalation according to bacterial susceptibility based
on positive cultures is recommended to minimise resis-
tance selection pressure (II-2;1).
/C15 The efﬁcacy of antibiotic therapy should be checked with
a second paracentesis at 48 h from starting treatment.
Failure of ﬁrst-line antibiotic therapy should be sus-
pected if there is worsening of clinical signs and symp-
toms and/or increase or no marked reduction in
leucocyte count (at least 25%) in 48 h (II-2;1).
/C15 The duration of treatment should be at least 5–7 days
(III;1).
/C15 Spontaneous bacterial empyema should be managed
similarly to SBP (II-2;2).
Intravenous albumin in patients with spontaneous bacterial peri-
tonitis. SBP without septic shock may precipitate deterioration
of circulatory function with severe liver failure, hepatic
encephalopathy, and type 1 HRS and has approximately 20%
hospital mortality despite infection resolution. 272 A ran-
domised, controlled study in patients with SBP treated with
cefotaxime showed that albumin (1.5 g/kg body weight at diag-
nosis, followed by 1 g/kg on day three) signiﬁcantly decreased
the incidence of type 1 HRS (from 30% to 10%) and reduced mor-
tality from 29% to 10% compared with cefotaxime alone. Treat-
ment with albumin was particularly effective in patients with
baseline serum bilirubin ≥68
lmol/L (4 mg/dl) or SCr ≥88
lmol/L (1 mg/dl). It is unclear whether i.v. albumin is useful
in patients with baseline bilirubin <68 lmol/L and creatinine
<88 lmol/L, as the incidence of type 1 HRS in patients meeting
these criteria was very low in the two treatment groups (7%
without albumin and 0% with albumin).
272 The application of
the schedule of this therapeutic option should be implemented
in clinical practice. 273 Non-randomised studies in patients with
SBP also show that the incidence of renal failure and death are
very low in patients with moderate liver failure and without
renal dysfunction at diagnosis of SBP, so albumin is probably
not necessary.
274
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 21
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Recommendation
/C15 The administration of albumin (1.5 g/kg at diagnosis and
1 g/kg on day 3) is recommended in patients with SBP(I;1).
Prophylaxis of SBP
Since most episodes of SBP are thought to result from the translo-
cation of enteric gram-negative bacteria, the ideal prophylactic
agent should be safe, affordable and effective at decreasing the
amounts of these organisms fro m the gut while preserving the
protective anaerobic ﬂora (selective intestinal decontamina-
tion).
267 Given the high cost and inevitable risk of developing
resistant organisms, the use of p rophylactic antibiotics must be
strictly restricted to patients at high risk of SBP.267 Three high-risk
patient populations have been identiﬁed: i) patients with acute GI
haemorrhage; ii) patients with low total protein content in ascitic
ﬂuid and no prior history of SBP (primary prophylaxis), and iii)
patients with a previous history of SBP (secondary prophylaxis).275
Primary prophylaxis in patients with low total protein content in
ascitic ﬂuid without prior history of SBP . Cirrhotic patients with
low ascitic ﬂuid protein concentration (<10 g/l) and/or high
serum bilirubin levels are at high risk of developing a ﬁrst epi-
sode of SBP.
267 Several studies have evaluated prophylaxis with
norﬂoxacin in patients without prior history of SBP.267 Fernandez
et al. randomised 68 patients with cirrhosis and low ascites pro-
tein levels (<15 g/l) with advanced liver failure (Child-Pugh score
≥9 points with serum bilirubin level ≥3 mg/dl) or impaired renal
function (SCr level ≥1.2 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen level ≥25 mg/dl,
or serum sodium level ≤130 mEq/L) to receive norﬂoxacin
(400 mg/day for 12 months) or placebo.
276 Norﬂoxacin signiﬁ-
cantly improved the three-month probability of survival (94%
vs. 62%; p = 0.03) but at one year the difference in survival
was not signiﬁcant (60% vs. 48%; p = 0.05). Norﬂoxacin adminis-
tration signiﬁcantly reduced the one-year probability of developing
SBP (7% vs. 61%) and HRS (28% vs. 41%). In a double-blind pla-
cebo-controlled trial, 100 patients with ascitic ﬂuid total protein
level <15 g/l were randomised to ciproﬂoxacin (500 mg/day for
12 months) or placebo.
277 The probability of survival at one year
was higher in patients receiving ciproﬂoxacin (86% vs. 66%;
p <0.04). Meta-analyses of all the trials together or including only
pure primary prophylaxis support a signiﬁcant preventive effect
against SBP (RR 0.2; 95% CI 0.07–0.52; p = 0.001).
278,279 The
survival beneﬁt is most pronounced at three months (94% vs.
62%, p = 0.003) and seems to decrease over time and may be lost
after 12 months follow-up (RR 0.65; 95% CI; 0.41–1.02). 280
Recommendations
/C15 Primary prophylaxsis with norﬂoxacin (400 mg/day) in
patients with Child-Pugh score ≥9 and serum bilirubin
level ≥3 mg/dl, with either impaired renal function or
hyponatraemia, and ascitic ﬂuid protein lower than 15
g/L is recommended (I;1).
/C15 Norﬂoxacin prophylaxis should be stopped in patients
with long-lasting improvement of their clinical condi-
tion and disappearance of ascites (III;1).
Patients with prior SBP
In patients who survive an episode of SBP, the cumulative recur-
rence rate at one year is approximately 70%.
33 Probability of
survival at one year after an episode of SBP is 30–50% and falls
to 25–30% at two years. Therefore, patients recovering from an
episode of SBP should be considered for LT. There is only one
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of nor-
ﬂoxacin (400 mg/day orally) in patients who had a previous epi-
sode of SBP.
281 Treatment with norﬂoxacin reduced the
probability of recurrence of SBP from 68% to 20%. In an open-
label, randomised study comparing norﬂoxacin 400 mg/day to
ruﬂoxacin 400 mg/week in the prevention of SBP recurrence,
the one-year probability of SBP recurrence was 26% and 36%,
respectively ( p = 0.16).
282 Norﬂoxacin was more effective in
the prevention of SBP recurrence due to Enterobacteriaceae (0%
vs. 22%, p = 0.01). The use of intermittent ciproﬂoxacin has been
associated with a higher rate of quinolone-resistant organisms
and should be avoided.
282,283 It is uncertain whether prophy-
laxis should be continued without interruption until LT or death
in all patients with prior SBP, or if treatment could be discontin-
ued in patients showing an improvement of liver disease. Many
patients receive rifaximin to prevent recurrent episodes of
HE.
284 However, rifaximin may also be effective against
recurrent SBP. 285 There are no data to guide new indications
for primary or secondary prophylaxis of SBP among patients
already on rifaximin. More in detail, it is not known whether
norﬂoxacin prophylaxis should be started in patients being trea-
ted with rifaximin for prevention of recurrent HE. Likewise, it is
not known whether norﬂoxacin prophylaxis should be stopped
in patients who would require rifaximin to prevent HE. Prospec-
tive studies are required to investigate the potential beneﬁts
and side effects of combined therapy with norﬂoxacin and
rifaximin.
Recommendations
/C15 The administration of prophylactic Norﬂoxacin (400
mg/day, orally) is recommended in patients who recover
from an episode of SBP (I;1).
/C15 Despite some promising evidence, at present, rifaximin
cannot be recommended as an alternative to norﬂoxacin
for secondary prophylaxis of SBP (I;2). Thus, at present,
no recommendation can be given to guide primary or
secondary prophylaxis of SBP among patients already
on rifaximin for the prevention of recurrent HE.
/C15 Patients who recover from SBP have a poor long-term
survival and should be considered for LT (II-2,1).
/C15 Since it has been suggested that PPI may increase the
risk for the development of SBP, its use should be
restricted to those with a clear indication (II-2,1).
Concomitant medications
Very frequently PPIs are used in patients with cirrhosis, which
may increase the risk of SBP. Indications for long-term use
should be carefully assessed and PPIs discontinued when possi-
ble.
286,287 NSBBs may be detrimental in end-stage liver disease
with haemodynamic derangement, patients should be moni-
tored closely and doses adjusted or drug discontinued if con-
traindications occur.
168,190,288 Probiotics have been assessed as
Clinical Practice Guidelines
22 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

combination therapy with norﬂoxacin in one randomised trial
in a mixed group of patients on primary and secondary preven-
tion of SBP. No additional beneﬁts were demonstrated.
289
Infections other than SBP
Prevalence, diagnosis and impact on prognosis
Non-SBP infections are frequent in patients with cirrhosis and
present or develop during hospitalisation in 25–30% of patients.
The most frequent infections other than SBP are: urinary tract,
pneumonia, skin and soft tissue infections, and bacter-
aemia.
242,290 They constitute a heterogeneous group regarding
clinical course and prognosis. Non-SBP infections increase the
odds ratio for death by 3.75 and are associated with a 30%
one-month and 63% 12-month mortality.
291 Endocarditis, sec-
ondary peritonitis, pneumonia and bacteraemia have worse
prognoses. The combination of data on liver and renal dysfunc-
tion and the type of infection enables the identiﬁcation of
patients with poor prognosis.
290 In particular, non-SBP infec-
tions, as well as SBP, are known as common precipitating factors
for ACLF.
3 An early diagnosis of all these infections and of SBP is
a crucial step in the management of patients with cirrhosis.
Since the presentation and the initial course of any bacterial
infection may be subtle and not very speciﬁc, clinical suspicion
is important. Indeed, all inpatients with cirrhosis should be con-
sidered as potentially infected until proven otherwise. There-
fore, a complete work-up should be carried out at admission
and at any time during the hospital stay when clinical deterio-
ration occurs.
6 In addition, close microbiological surveillance is
needed in patients who are at risk of developing infections
caused by methicillin resistant organisms. C reactive protein
and procalcitonin can be used for detecting infection and to
deﬁne the severity of the infection,
6 while their use in the
stewardship of antibiotic treatment deserves further
investigation.292 To optimise the empirical antibiotic treatment,
it is quite important to distinguish among community acquired,
health care associated and nosocomial infections. Mortality for
nosocomial infections is higher (25–48%) than for community-
acquired infection (7–21%) since they are more commonly
sustained by MDR bacteria.
6,266,268 Like in SBP, there is an
increasing challenge of resistant bacteria among non-SBP infec-
tions. Among 312 patients with cirrhosis and blood stream
infections gram-negative bacteria, gram-positive bacteria and
Candida were the cause of blood stream infections episodes in
53%, 47% and 7% of the cases, and 31% of the infections were
caused by MDR bacteria.
293
Management of infections other than SBP
In a randomised trial 94 patients with cirrhosis and infections
(most prevalent were urinary tract infections [46%], SBP [22%],
and pneumonia [19%]) were randomised to a broad-spectrum
antibiotic regimen or a standard regimen. In–hospital mortality
was signiﬁcantly higher in the standard than in the broad-spec-
trum group (25% vs. 6%; p = 0.01).
294 Some more speciﬁc sugges-
tions on the empirical antibiotic treatment of infections other
than SBP based on the type, the severity and the environment
of the infection as well as on local resistance proﬁles are given
(Figs. 5–7 ). In patients who fail to respond to a broad-spectrum
antibiotic treatment a fungal infection, including fungal SBP
295
should be suspected and investigated. 296
Finally, in two randomised trials, concomitant albumin may
protect against deterioration in renal and circulatory func-
tion.297,298 However, albumin did not improve survival and thus
it cannot be recommended. The issue of the management of infec-
tions sustained by XDR bacteria has been previously developed.
Recommendations
/C15 Infections other than SBP are frequent and associated
with increased mortality. Hospitalised patients with cir-
rhosis should be assessed and monitored closely for the
presence of infections to enable early diagnosis and
appropriate treatment (II-1;1).
/C15 Empirical antibiotic therapy should be commenced
promptly at suspicion of infection (II-1;1).
/C15 The choice of empirical antibiotic therapy should be
based on several factors including: environment (noso-
comial vs. health care associated or community
acquired), local resistance proﬁles, severity and type of
infection (I;1).
Cellulitis
Community-acquired
cellulitis
Healthcare-
associated cellulitis
Nosocomial
cellulitis
Piperacillin-
tazobactam
or 3rd generation
cephalosporin +
oxacillin 
AREA DEPENDENT:
Like nosocomial
infections if high
prevalence of MDROs 
or if sepsis
3rd generation
cephalosporin or
meropemen + oxacillin
or glycopeptides or
daptomycin or
linezolid* 
Fig. 5. Recommended empirical antibiotic treatment of soft tissue infec-
tions (adapted from Ref. 6). MDRO, multidrug resistant organism.
Pneumonia
Community-acquired
pneumonia
Healthcare-associated
pneumonia
Nosocomial
pneumonia
Piperacillin-tazobactam
or ceftriaxone + 
macrolide or
levofloxacin or  
moxifloxacin
AREA DEPENDENT:
Like nosocomial
infections if high
prevalence of MDROs§
or if sepsis
Ceftazidime or 
meropemen§ +
levofloxacin ± 
glycopeptides or
linezolid#
Fig. 6. Recommended empirical antibiotic treatment of pneumonia
(adapted from Ref. 6). MDRO, multidrug resistant organism.
UTI
Community-acquired
UTI
Healthcare-
associated UTI
Nosocomial
UTI
UNCOMPLICATED:
ciprofloxacin or
cotrimoxazole
IF SEPSIS: 3rd 
generation cephalospo-
rin or piperacillin-
tazobactam
AREA DEPENDENT: 
Like nosocomial
infections if high
prevalence of MDR§
or if sepsis
UNCOMPLICATED: 
fosfomycin or 
nitrofurantoin 
IF SEPSIS: 
meropemen + 
teicoplanin or 
vancomycin§ #
Fig. 7. Recommended empirical antibiotic treatment of UTI (adapted from
Ref. 6). MDR, multidrug resistant; UTI, urinary tract infection.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 23
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

/C15 In the context of high bacterial resistance to antibiotics,
carbapenem alone or in combination with other antibi-
otics proved to be superior to third-generation cephalos-
porins in healthcare associated infections other than SBP,
and therefore, should be preferred (I;1).
/C15 Severe infections sustained by XDR bacteria can require
the use of antibiotics known to be highly nephrotoxic
in patients with cirrhosis such as vancomycin or amino-
glycosides. In these cases, patients’ plasma level should
be monitored in accordance with local policy thresholds
(III;1).
/C15 Routine use of albumin is not recommended in infec-
tions other than SBP (I;1).
Prophylaxis of infections other than SBP
There is preliminary evidence that in patients with Child-Pugh
class C, norﬂoxacin administration can reduce the risk of infec-
tions and can decrease six-month mortality. However, more
data are needed before a recommendation can be made.
21
Renal impairment
Deﬁnition and diagnosis
Renal impairment in patients with cirrhosis was deﬁned more
than 30 years ago by an SCr value ≥1.5 mg/dl because this value
was considered an index of GFR ≤40 ml/min. 32 The use of SCr in
the evaluation of renal function in patients with cirrhosis, has
several well-known limitations. However, the diagnosis of renal
dysfunction in liver disease is still based on it.
32,299 The diagno-
sis should be based on different diagnostic categories including
chronic kidney disease (CKD) and acute renal failure (ARF).
When only based on reduction of GFR, the diagnosis of CKD in
patients with cirrhosis is still challenging, because all the SCr-
based equations that have been proposed overestimate GFR in
patients with cirrhosis.
300–304 It can be reasonably assumed that
patients with decompensated cirrhosis frequently have CKD
caused by certain comorbidities ( i.e. diabetes, arterial hyperten-
sion) and/or speciﬁc causes ( i.e. IgA nephropathy, virus-induced
glomerulopathy),305 however the prevalence of CKD in this pop-
ulation is still unknown. ARF is a common complication in
patients with decompensated cirrhosis.
306 Historically, the diag-
nosis was based on an increase in SCr of 50% from baseline to a
ﬁnal value >1.5 mg/dl (133 lmol/L).1,32,307 Recently, the term
ARF was replaced by AKI, 308–310 irrespectively of its different
types. AKI is now deﬁned, as proposed by the Kidney Disease
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) group, 310 as either an
absolute increase in SCr of more than or equal to 0.3 mg/dl
(≥26.4
lmol/L) in less than 48 h, or by a percentage increase
in SCr of more or equal to 50% (1.5-fold from baseline) in less
than seven days. A new staging system was also introduced,
mainly based on the percentage increase of SCr from baseline
(Table 7), either at the time of the ﬁrst fulﬁllment of the KDIGO
criteria (initial stage) or at the peak value of SCr during hospital-
isation in case of progressive AKI (peak stage).
310 Based on the
staging system and according to the results of several prospec-
tive studies, 311–317 a new algorithm for the management of AKI
in patients with cirrhosis has been proposed 318 (Fig. 8 ). Recent
studies have suggested that in patients with cirrhosis, in AKI
stage 1, SCr <1.5 mg/dl is associated with a worse outcome than
an SCr ≥1.5 mg/dl. 313,314,317 Thus, in contrast with the KDIGO
staging system, it has been proposed to distinguish between a
stage 1A (SCr <1.5 mg/dl) and a stage 1B (SCr ≥1.5 mg/dl) within
AKI stage 1. 313,314,317 It should be highlighted that the KDIGO
criteria also include criteria based on urinary output in the diag-
nosis of AKI ( Fig. 9).310 These criteria were not considered by the
recent International Club of Ascites (ICA) consensus because (a)
these patients are frequently oliguric with avid sodium reten-
tion, despite a relatively normal GFR, (b) they may have an
increased urine output because of diuretics, and (c) on a regular
ward, urine collection is often inaccurate and always
untimely.
318 However, these criteria may also be applied when-
ever a patient with cirrhosis requires a bladder catheter. The
deﬁnition of baseline SCr used in the KDIGO criteria is crucial
since it has been observed that about 25–30% of episodes of
AKI occur before hospitalisation, representing the so-called
‘‘community-acquired AKI”. Ideally, ‘‘community-acquired AKI”
should be diagnosed at the time of hospital admission, requir-
ing, according to the KDIGO criteria, an SCr value dated within
Table 7 . International Club of Ascites (ICA-AKI) new deﬁnitions for the diagnosis and management of acute kidney injury in patients with cirrhosis.
Subject Deﬁnition
Baseline sCr A value of sCr obtained in the previous three months, when available, can be used as baseline sCr. In patients with more than one value withi n
the previous three months, the value closest to the admission time to the hospital should be used
In patients without a previous sCr value, the sCr on admission should be used as baseline.
Deﬁnition of
AKI
- Increase in sCr ≥0.3 mg/dl (≥26.5 lmol/L) within 48 h; or,
- A percentage increase sCr ≥50% which is known, or presumed, to have occurred within the prior seven days
Staging of
AKI
- Stage 1: increase in sCr ≥0.3 mg/dl (≥26.5 lmol/L) or an increase in sCr ≥1.5-fold to 2-fold from baseline;
- Stage 2: increase in sCr >2-fold to 3-fold from baseline;
- Stage 3: increase of sCr >3-fold from baseline or sCr ≥4.0 mg/dl (353.6 lmol/L) with an acute increase ≥0.3 mg/dl (≥26.5 lmol/L) or initiation
of renal replacement therapy
Progression
of AKI
Progression Regression
Progression of AKI to a higher
stage and/or need for RRT
Regression of AKI to a lower stage
Response to
treatment
No response Partial response Full response
No regression of AKI Regression of AKI stage with a reduction of sCr to ≥0.3
mg/dl (≥26.5 lmol/L) above the baseline value
Return of sCr to a value within 0.3 mg/dl
(≥26.5 lmol/L) of the baseline value
AKI, acute kidney injury; sCr, serum creatinine; RRT, renal replacement therapy.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
24 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

the last week before admission. This point is so crucial for the
application of the KDIGO criteria that it has been suggested that
an SCr value be calculated when not available the seven days
prior to admission. The baseline SCr can be calculated by inver-
sely applying the formulas that are used to calculate the esti-
mated GFR, considering normal values of GFR of 75 ml/min.
319
Whilst an imputed SCr is accepted in the general population,
it can not be used in patients with cirrhosis. 320 Indeed, all
SCr-based formulas overestimate the true GFR in these patients
leading to an overestimation of the baseline SCr and thus under-
estimating the prevalence of AKI on admission.
320 Therefore, it
has been proposed that not only the value obtained in the last
seven days, but also that within the last three months be con-
sidered as a baseline value of SCr in patients with cirrhosis
(Table 7). In addition, an SCr value obtained within the last three
months is the reference to deﬁne acute kidney disease (AKD), a
third category of renal impairment, along with AKI and CKD,
which has been recently proposed in KDIGO recommendations.
AKD is clearly a distinct category with different outcome,
whether or not it is associated with AKI. AKD is deﬁned by a
GFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m
2 for less than three months, or a
decrease in GFR ≥35% for less than three months, or an increase
in SCr <50% within the last three months ( Table 8). However, no
data exist about the prognostic impact of AKD, with or without
AKI, in patients with cirrhosis. Thus, waiting for these data, it
seems even more justiﬁed to make the diagnosis of AKI in
patients with cirrhosis on an increase in SCr ≥50% during the
last three months. This assumption may also facilitate the diag-
nosis of AKI overlapping CKD.
Recommendations
/C15 In patients with liver diseases, even a mild increase in
SCr should be considered since it may underlie a marked
decrease of GFR (II-2;1).
/C15 The ﬁrst step to be addressed in the diagnostic process is
to establish if the patient has a CKD, AKD or AKI as well
as an overlap between these diagnostic categories
(II-2;1).
/C15 The diagnosis of CKD should be based on a GFR <60 ml/
min/1.73 m
2 estimated by SCr-based formulas, with or
without, signs of renal parenchymal damage (protein-
uria/haeamturia/ultrasongraphy abnormalities) for at
least three months (II-2;1).
/C15 The diagnostic process should be completed by staging
CKD, which relies on GFR levels, and by investigating
its cause. It should be highlighted that any SCr based
formula overestimates GFR in patients with cirrhosis
(II-2, 1) .
Resolution
Close follow up
Response ?
NO
NO YES
Persistance Progression YES
Close monitoring
Remove risk factors (withdrawal of nephrotoxic drugs, vasodilators and 
NSAIDs, taper/withdraw diuretics and β-blockers, expand plasma 
volume, treat infections* when diagnosed)
Initial AKI# stage 1a°
Further treatment of 
AKI decided on a 
case-by-case basis
Initial AKI# stage >1a°
Withdrawal of diuretics (if not yet applied) and volume 
expansion with albumin (1 g/kg) for 2 days
Does AKI meet criteria of HRS ?
Specific 
treatment for 
other AKI 
phenotypes
Vasoconstrictors 
and albumin
#AKI at the first fulfilling of KDIGO criteria
Fig. 8. Algorithm for the management of AKI in patients with cirrhosis (adapted from Ref. 318). AKI, acute kidney injury; HRS, hepatorenal syndrome;
NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory.
KDIGO urine output criteria = an urinary output <0.5 ml/kg B.W./h/x 6-12 h
Stage Serum creatinine criteria
1° An urinary output <0.5 ml/kg B. W./h x 6- 12 h
2° An urinary output <0.5 ml/kg B.W./h x 12 h
3° An urinary output <0.5 ml/kg B.W./h x 24 h or anuria per 12 h
Fig. 9. Criteria based on urinary output for the diagnosis of AKI (adapted
from Ref. 310). AKI, acute kidney injury; B.W., body weight.
Table 8 . Deﬁnitions of kidney disease.
Deﬁnition Functional criteria Structural
criteria
AKI Increase in sCr ≥50% within seven days,
or
increase in sCr ≥0.3 mg/dl within two days
No criteria
AKD GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 for <3 months,
or
decrease in GFR ≥35% for < 3 months,
or
increase in sCr ≥50 % for < 3 months
Kidney damage
for <3 months
CKD GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m
2 for ≥3 months Kidney damage
for ≥3 months
AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease;
GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate; sCr, serum creatinine.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 25
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

/C15 In patients with cirrhosis the diagnosis of AKI should be
based on adapted KDIGO criteria, thus, either on an
increase in SCr of >0.3 mg/dl from baseline within 48 h,
or an increase of ≥50% from baseline within three
months (II-2,1).
/C15 The staging of AKI should be based on an adapted KDIGO
staging system, thus distinguishing within AKI stage 1,
between AKI stage 1A and AKI stage 1B according to a
value of SCr <1.5 or ≥1.5 mg/dl, respectively (II-2,1).
Precipitating factors
Infections, diuretic-induced excessive diuresis, GI bleeding,
therapeutic paracentesis without adequate volume expansion,
nephrotoxic drugs, and NSAIDs are the other common precipi-
tating factors of AKI in patients with cirrhosis.
20,242,306 The
nephrotoxicity of contrast agents is still debated in patients
with cirrhosis321 but contrast imaging should be performed cau-
tiously, particularly in decompensated cirrhosis or in patients
with known CKD. Finally, the increase in intra-abdominal pres-
sure associated with tense ascites may lead to AKI, by increasing
renal venous pressure.
322–324
Management
The cause of AKI should be investigated as soon as possible, to
prevent AKI progression. However, even in the absence of a deﬁni-
tive recognised cause of AKI, the management should be immedi-
ately started according to the initial stage ( Fig. 2). Irrespective of
the stage, diuretics should be discontinued. Similarly, even if
there are controversial data, beta-blockers should be stopped.
168
Other precipitating factors of AKI should be identiﬁed and treated,
including screening and treatment of infection, volume expan-
sion when appropriate, and discontinuation of all nephrotoxic
drugs, such as vasodilators or NSAIDs.
318 Volume replacement
should be used in accordance with the cause and the severity of
ﬂuid loss. Patients with diarrhoea or excessive diuresis should
be treated with crystalloids, whilst patients with acute GI bleed-
ing should be given packed red blood cells to maintain haemoglo-
bin level between 7–9 g/dl.
325 In patients with AKI and tense
ascites, therapeutic paracentesis should be associated with albu-
min infusion since it improves renal function. 326 In case of no
obvious cause and AKI stage >1A, 20% albumin solution at the
dose of 1 g of albumin/kg of body weight (with a maximum of
100 g of albumin) for two consecutive days should be given.
307
All other therapeutic options, especially renal replacement ther-
apy (RRT) and kidney transplantation will be discussed in the sec-
tion dedicated to the management of HRS-AKI.
Recommendations
/C15 When a diagnosis of AKI is made, its cause should be
investigated as soon as possible to prevent AKI progres-
sion. Even in absence of an obvious cause, the manage-
ment should be immediately started. Maximal
attention in the screening and treatment of infections
should be carried out (II-2,1).
/C15 Diuretics and/or beta-blockers as well as other drugs
that could be associated with the occurrence of AKI such
as vasodilators, NSAIDs and nephrotoxic drugs should be
immediately stopped (II-2,1).
/C15 Volume replacement should be used in accordance with
the cause and severity of ﬂuid losses (II-2,1).
/C15 In case of no obvious cause of AKI, AKI stage >1A or infec-
tion-induced AKI, 20% albumin solution should be used at
the dose of 1 g of albumin/kg of body weight (with a max-
imum of 100 g of albumin) for two consecutive days(III,1).
/C15 In patients with AKI and tense ascites, therapeutic para-
centesis should be associated with albumin infusion even
when a low volume of ascetic ﬂuid is removed (III,1).
Types of AKI
All types of AKI can occur in patients with cirrhosis, namely pre-
renal AKI, HRS-AKI, intrarenal or intrinsic AKI, and post-renal
AKI. The most common cause of AKI in hospitalised patients
with decompensated cirrhosis is pre-renal, accounting for
approximately 68% of the cases.
306,327,328 Intrarenal-AKI is
mainly represented by acute tubular necrosis (ATN). 306 Finally,
post-renal AKI is uncommon in decompensated cirrhosis. 328
Considering that most cases of pre-renal AKI are resolved by
volume expansion and that post-renal AKI is uncommon, the
key point is to differentiate HRS-AKI from ATN. As described
in the section ‘‘Hepatorenal syndrome”, the concept that HRS
is only a functional injury has been challenged during the last
decade and, thus, the deﬁnition of HRS probably has to be
revised. In addition, as kidney biopsy is rarely performed in
the setting of AKI in clinical practice, the distinction between
HRS-AKI and ATN is difﬁcult. Recently, novel biomarkers have
emerged in this setting and urinary neutrophil gelatinase-
associated lipocalin (NGAL) is the most promising. Indeed, sev-
eral studies have shown that urinary NGAL, a marker of tubular
damage, could help to determine the type of AKI.
329–335
However, cut-off values differ greatly according to series, there
are overlaps between the different types of AKI and it should be
highlighted that no study has conﬁrmed the diagnosis by
reference kidney biopsy. Diagnosis based on a combination of
multiple biomarkers may be interesting but needs further
evaluation.
329,330,332–334
Recommendations
/C15 All types of AKI can occur in patients with cirrhosis,
namely pre-renal, HRS, intrinsic, particularly ATN, and
post-renal. Therefore, it is important to differentiate
among them (II-2,1).
/C15 The diagnosis of HRS-AKI is based on revised ICA criteria.
As kidney biopsy is rarely performed in the setting of
AKI, biomarkers should be implemented In clinical prac-
tice among the different biomarkers to date, urinary
NGAL can be used to distinguish between ATN and HRS
(II-2;2).
Prognosis
In patients with decompensated cirrhosis, AKI has a negative
impact on hospital survival according to either the initial stage,
314
or the peak stage. 313,317 Even transient episodes of AKI are
associated with a negative impact on mid-term survival. 315
Nevertheless, a more comprehensive prognostic classiﬁcation
Clinical Practice Guidelines
26 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

also considering extra-renal organ failures is much more accurate
than the KDIGO criteria for the prognosis in these patients.
Finally, looking to the data in the general population, it should
be highlighted that the risk for developing CKD is higher in
patients with severe or repeated episodes of AKI.
336 Since patients
with decompensated cirrhosis are prone to develop frequent
episodes of AKI, it can be speculated that they are at higher risk
of developing CKD.
Hepatorenal syndrome
Deﬁnition, diagnosis and classiﬁcation
For a long time, HRS has been deﬁned as ‘‘a functional renal fail-
ure caused by intrarenal vasoconstriction which occurs in
patients with end-stage liver disease as well as in patients with
acute liver failure or alcoholic hepatitis”.
32,307 Several data chal-
lenge this deﬁnition of HRS as well as the classiﬁcation in type 1
and type 2. Firstly, as described below, pathogenesis of HRS
includes both haemodynamic and inﬂammatory changes. Sec-
ondly, the absence of renal parenchymal damage, deﬁning the
functional nature, has never been proven by renal biop-
sies.
337,338 The absence of signiﬁcant proteinuria and/or haema-
turia do not rule out renal lesions, particularly tubular and
interstitial lesions.
307 In addition, studies assessing novel kidney
biomarkers have shown that tubular damage can occur in
patients with HRS-AKI when HRS is diagnosed according to
the traditional criteria.
328–330,332 Finally, it should be noted that
HRS-AKI can occur in patients with underlying CKD. Type 1 and
type 2 were historically deﬁned based on time frame SCr
increase.32,307 In the recent revised classiﬁcation, type 1 HRS
now corresponds to HRS-AKI. 318 Consequently, type 2 HRS
should now include renal impairment which fulﬁlls the criteria
of HRS but not of AKI, namely non-AKI-HRS (NAKI), and only
HRS-CKD as previously proposed.
339
Pathophysiology
According to the new theory that has been developed on the
pathophysiology of decompensated cirrhosis, 5 the view on
HRS has been changed in recent years, moving from the idea
that it was only related to renal hypoperfusion due to macrocir-
culatory dysfunction ( i.e. splanchnic arterial vasodilation and
reduction of cardiac output).
192,338 The new theory is that the
increased circulating levels of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and
chemokines
340,341 may exercise a direct relevant role in the
development of HRS. Such cytokines have been associated with
renal impairment in patients and in animal models of cirrhosis
with infection. 342–345 Moving from the concept that AKI and
HRS-AKI are often precipitated by bacterial infection, the new
hypothesis on the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced AKI should
also be considered. 346–348 This theory proposes that a synergic
interplay of inﬂammation and microvascular dysfunction is
responsible for the ampliﬁcation of the signal that PAMPs and
DAMPs exert on proximal epithelial tubular cells. The recogni-
tion of this signal and its subsequent spread to all the other
proximal tubular epithelial cells cause a mitochondria-medi-
ated metabolic downregulation and reprioritisation of cell func-
tions to favour survival processes above all else.
349 The
sacriﬁced functions include the absorption on the lumen side
of sodium and chloride. The consequent increases of sodium
chloride delivery to the macula densa triggers further intrarenal
activation of the RAAS and thus lowers GFR. Finally, severe
cholestasis may further impair renal function by worsening
inﬂammation and/or macrocirculatory dysfunction, or by
promoting bile salt-related direct tubular damage.
350,351 All
these ﬁndings suggest that the pathophysiology of AKI, and par-
ticular of HRS-AKI, in patients with decompensated cirrhosis
seems more complex than previously hypothesised, supporting
the concept that AKI-HRS is not purely functional in nature.
Management
The non-speciﬁc management of AKI as been previously
described. Thus, in this section, drug therapy, TIPS, RRT, LT
and simultaneous liver and kidney transplantation (SLK) will
be considered.
Drug therapy
. Once the diagnosis of HRS-AKI has been made,
patients should promptly receive vasoconstrictive drugs, in
association with albumin. The rational for using vasoconstric-
tors is to counteract the splanchnic arterial vasodilation,
improving renal perfusion.
352 Terlipressin, a vasopressin ana-
logue, is the most commonly used. The efﬁcacy of terlipressin
plus albumin in the treatment of HRS has been proven in many
studies.
353–360 In the most recent studies, rates of response
(complete or partial response) to this treatment range from 64
to 76%, with a complete response, from 46 to 56%.
358–360 These
response rates must now be evaluated according to the new def-
initions of responses in HRS-AKI recently proposed by the ICA
(Table 7 ). In two meta-analyses terlipressin plus albumin was
proven to improve not only renal function but also short-term
survival in patients with HRS.
361,362 Terlipressin was initially
proposed to be administered by i.v. boluses at a starting dose
of 0.5–1 mg every 4–6 h, progressively increased to a maximum
of 2 mg every 4–6 h in case of a reduction of baseline SCr <
25%.
353–358 Adding albumin to terlipressin is more effective
than terlipressin alone.354 One possible explanation is that albu-
min, by increasing volaemia, may counteract the decrease in
cardiac output associated with HRS 192 but also by terli-
pressin.363 In addition, antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory prop-
erties of albumin may have a beneﬁcial effect. 364 The dose of
albumin in HRS treatment has not been well established. Stud-
ies have suggested adapting the dose according to the level of
central venous pressure (CVP), but there is evidence that CVP
is inaccurate to manage volume expansion and to assess cardiac
output in patients with cirrhosis. In contrast, CVP may be help-
ful to prevent circulatory overload. Albumin has been used
intravenously at the mean dose of 20–40 g/day. Treatment
should be maintained until a complete response (SCr below
1.5 mg/dl) or for a maximum of 14 days either in case of partial
response (decrease of SCr ≥50 with a ﬁnal value still higher than
1.5 mg/dl) or in case of non-response. More recently, continuous
i.v. infusion of terlipressin at an initial dose of 2 mg/day was
proposed,
359,365 demonstrating a similar rate of response but
lower adverse effects than the administration of the drug by
i.v. boluses.
360 Indeed, terlipressin, when administered by con-
tinuous i.v. infusion, has a more stable lowering effect on portal
pressure, even when used at lower doses than those provided by
i.v. boluses.360 The most common side effects of terlipressin are
diarrhoea, abdominal pain, circulatory overload and cardiovas-
cular ischaemic complications which have been reported in up
to 45–46% of patients when the drug was delivered by i.v.
boluses.
360 The rate of discontinuation because of side effects,
mainly cardiovascular, is around 20%. 360 Accordingly, a careful
clinical screening including electrocardiogram is recommended
in all patients before starting treatment. Patients can be treated
on a regular ward but the decision to transfer to a higher level of
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 27
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

care should be case based. Recurrent HRS in responders, after
the end of the treatment, has been reported in up to 20% of
cases. Re-treatment is usually effective, however, in some cases,
continuous recurrence occurs, thus a long-term treatment with
terlipressin plus albumin and a long-term hospitalisation are
required.
366 The possibility of treating some of these patients
outside the hospital has recently been proposed 367 but even if
promising, further studies are needed. Other vasoconstrictive
drugs include i.v. noradrenaline and oral midodrine plus subcu-
taneous or i.v. octretide, both in combination with albumin.
Noradrenaline, given by continuous i.v. infusion at the dose of
0.5–3 mg/h, has been proven to be as effective as terlipressin
regarding the increase in mean arterial pressure, the reversal
of renal impairment and one-month survival.
368–371 However,
the number of patients treated with noradrenaline remains
too small to deﬁnitively conﬁrm its efﬁcacy. In addition, in con-
trast to terlipressin, the use of noradrenaline always requires a
central venous line and, in most countries, the transfer of the
patient to an intensive care unit (ICU). The combination mido-
drine plus octreotide, used in countries where terlipressin is
not yet available,
372 has been shown to be much less effective
than terlipressin in the treatment of type 1 HRS in a recent
RCT.
359 Vasoconstrictors, in particular terlipressin, in associa-
tion with albumin, have also been proposed in the treatment
of type 2 HRS. The treatment has been proven to be effective
in most cases but, unfortunately, recurrence after the with-
drawal of treatment is the norm. In addition, there are contro-
versial data about the impact of this treatment on outcomes,
especially in candidates for LT.
373,374 This may be, at least in
part, due to the suboptimal deﬁnition of type 2 HRS, as previ-
ously discussed. The most relevant factors that may impair
the response to vasoconstrictors are: a) the baseline value of
SCr, b) the degree of inﬂammation and c) the degree of cholesta-
sis.
375–377 The ﬁnding that the higher baseline values of SCr, the
lower rate of response to terlipressin plus albumin, 375 probably
reﬂects the presence of renal parenchymal damage 337 and rep-
resents one of the main reasons behind the adoption of the
KDIGO criteria for the deﬁnition of AKI in patients with cirrho-
sis, and the introduction of the new algorithm for its manage-
ment. Regarding inﬂammation, it has been recently shown
that, for the same value of baseline SCr, the rate of response is
related to the number of extra-renal organ failures.
376
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts . The use of TIPS
may improve renal function in patients with type 1 HRS. 378,379
However, the applicability of TIPS in this clinical setting is usu-
ally very limited because, in most patients, TIPS is contraindi-
cated because of severe degree of liver failure. TIPS has been
studied in patients with type 2 HRS
380 and in the management
of refractory ascites, frequently associated with type 2 HRS. In
these patients, TIPS has been shown to improve renal function.95,379
Renal replacement therapy . Renal replacement therapy should be
considered in the management of AKI, whatever the type. As far
as HRS-AKI, it should be considered in non-responders to vaso-
constrictors. RRT should also be considered in patients with
end-stage kidney disease. The indications for RRT are the same
in patients with cirrhosis as in the general population including:
severe and/or refractory electrolyte or acid-base imbalance,
Recommendations
/C15 Vasoconstrictors and albumin are recommended in all
patients meeting the current deﬁnition of AKI-HRS stage
>1A, should be expeditiously treated with vasoconstric-
tors and albumin (III;1).
/C15 Terlipressin plus albumin should be considered as the
ﬁrst-line therapeutic option for the treatment of HRS-
AKI. Telipressin can be used by i.v. boluses at the initial
dose of 1 mg every 4–6 h. However, giving terlipressin
by continuous i.v. infusion at initial dose of 2 mg/day
makes it possible to reduce the global daily dose of the
drug and, thus, the rate of its adverse effects. In case of
non-response (decrease in SCr <25% from the peak value),
after two days, the dose of terlipressin should be increased
in a stepwise manner to a maximum of 12 mg/day (I;1).
/C15 Albumin solution (20%) should be used at the dose
20–40 g/day. Ideally, apart from routinely monitoring
patients with HRS-AKI, the serial measurement of CVP
or other measures of assessing central blood volume,
can help to prevent circulatory overload by optimising
the ﬂuid balance and helping to titrate the dose of albu-
min (II-2;1).
/C15 Noradrenaline can be an alternative to terlipressin. How-
ever, limited information is available (I;2).
/C15 In contrast to terlipressin, the use of noradrenaline
always requires a central venous line and, in several
countries, the transfer of the patient to an ICU. Mido-
drine plus octreotide can be an option only when terli-
pressin or noradrenaline are unavailable, but its
efﬁcacy is much lower than that of terlipressin (I;1).
/C15 According to the new deﬁnition of HRS-AKI, complete
response to the treatment should be deﬁned by a ﬁnal
SCr within 0.3 mg/dl (26.5
lmol/L) from the baseline
value, while partial response should be deﬁned by the
regression of AKI stage to a ﬁnal SCr ≥0.3 mg/dl (26.5
lmol/L) from the baseline value (III;1).
/C15 Adverse events related to terlipressin or noradrenaline
include ischaemic and cardiovascular events. Thus, a care-
ful clinical screening including electrocardiogram is rec-
ommended before starting the treatment. Patients can be
treated on a regular ward, but the decision to transfer to
higher dependency care should be case based. For the dura-
tion of treatment, it is important to closely monitor the
patients. According to the type and severity of side effects,
treatment should be modiﬁed or discontinued (I;1).
/C15 In cases of recurrence of HRS-AKI upon treatment cessa-
tion, a repeat course of therapy should be given (I;1).
/C15 Terlipressin plus albumin is also effective in the treat-
ment of HRS outside the criteria of AKI (HRS-NAKI), for-
merly known as HRS type II. Unfortunately, recurrence
after the withdrawal of the treatment is the norm, and
controversial data exists on the impact of the treatment
on long-term clinical outcome, particularly from the per-
spective of LT. As such, vasoconstrictors and albumin are
not recommended in this clinical scenario (I;1).
Clinical Practice Guidelines
28 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

severe or refractory volume overload, and/or symptomatic
azotaemia. However, published data on RRT in patients with
cirrhosis are scant, with controversial effects on survival.
381,382
It has been stated that indications for RRT depend on the per-
spective of LT. It has been stated that RRT may be considered
in patients who are candidates for LT, while, in contrast, the
decision to initiate RRT in non-candidates should be individu-
alised to avoid futility.
20 However, it has recently been observed
that critically ill liver cirrhotic patients requiring RRT have very
high mortality independent of LT options. Thus, RRT and treat-
ment at the ICU should not be limited to LT candidates but
should be based on the individual severity of illness.
383 There-
fore, repeated risk stratiﬁcation is necessary during the course
of treatment, assisted by prognostic scores in addition to clinical
judgment and patients 0 wishes.383 The ideal timing for RRT ini-
tiation has not been deﬁned in patients with cirrhosis. However,
data on AKI in patients with acute liver failure as well as in crit-
ically ill patients without liver disease suggest that early RRT
improves survival.
384–386 Both haemodialysis or continuous
renal replacement therapy (CRRT), have been used in patients
with cirrhosis. Despite the available evidence, 387 CRRT is prob-
ably better tolerated, providing greater cardiovascular stability
and allowing a slower correction of severe or refractory hypona-
traemia than haemodialysis.
Liver support systems
. In two controlled studies, both the so-
called artiﬁcial liver support systems, either the molecular
adsorbents recirculating system (MARS
/C210) or Prometheus /C210,
showed promising beneﬁcial effects in patients with type 1
HRS, but should be further investigated. 388,389
Liver transplantation and simultaneous liver-kidney transplanta-
tion. The best therapeutic option in patients with HRS is LT. 390
However, several studies have shown that SCr after LT is higher
in patients transplanted with HRS, compared to those without
HRS at the time of LT. In addition, the presence of HRS at the
time of LT has a negative impact on survival after LT.
391 The
treatment of type 2 HRS before LT has given conﬂicting results
on the clinical outcome after LT
373,374 and thus, requires further
investigation. SLK can be indicated in patients with cirrhosis
and CKD in the following conditions: a) estimated GFR (using
MDRD6 equation) ≤40 ml/min or measured GFR using iothala-
mate clearance ≤30 ml/min, b) proteinuria ≥2 g a day, c) kidney
biopsy showing >30% global glomerulosclerosis or >30% intersti-
tial ﬁbrosis, or d) inherited metabolic disease. SLK is also indi-
cated in patients with cirrhosis and sustained AKI irrespective
of its type, including HRS-AKI when refractory to drug therapy,
in the following conditions: a) AKI on RRT for ≥4 weeks or b)
estimated GFR ≤ 35 ml/min or measured GFR ≤25 ml/min ≥4
weeks.
392 Beyond these two conditions, in a candidate with high
priority for LT due to a high MELD score, the option of SLK may
be considered in the presence of risk factors for underlying
undiagnosed CKD (diabetes, hypertension, abnormal renal
imaging and proteinuria >2 g/day).
392 The development of
new biomarkers of kidney ﬁbrosis, a common and irreversible
feature of CKD, is also promising in this context.
393
Regarding the priority allocation of patients with HRS-AKI to
the waiting list, some rules should be applied in case of
response to drug therapy. In fact, by lowering SCr and increasing
serum sodium concentration, the treatment can signiﬁcantly
lower the MELD and MELD-Na score, potentially delaying LT.
Considering that the survival rate in responders at three months
is almost 50%, a speciﬁc policy of priority allocation is needed
for these patients. This can be made either by continuing to con-
sider the baseline MELD and/or MELD-Na score
394 rather than
those during or after the end of the treatment, or by providing
an exception to the MELD score. 395
Recommendations
/C15 There is insufﬁcient data to advocate TIPS in HRS-AKI but
it could be suggested in selected patients with HRS-NAKI
(II-2;2).
/C15 LT is the best therapeutic option for patients with HRS
regardless of the response to drug therapy (I;1).
/C15 The decision to initiate RRT should be based on the indi-
vidual severity of illness (I;2).
/C15 The indication for liver-kidney transplantation remains
controversial. This procedure should be considered in
patients with signiﬁcant CKD or with sustained AKI
including HRS-AKI with no response to drug therapy
(II-2;1).
Prevention of hepatorenal symdrome
The prevention of HRS-AKI, as for other causes of AKI, is based
on the use of albumin in patients who develop SBP
272 and the
prevention of SBP using norﬂoxacin, 276 as discussed before. In
addition, the use of pentoxyﬁlline may decrease the incidence
of renal failure in patients with cirrhosis
27 and of type 1 HRS
as well as mortality in patients with severe alcoholic hepati-
tis.396 However, recent papers do not conﬁrm these
results397,398 and further studies are needed.
Recommendations
/C15 Albumin (1.5 g/kg at diagnosis and 1 g/kg on day three)
should be given in patients with SBP to prevent AKI (I;1).
/C15 Norﬂoxacin (400mg/day) should be given as prophylaxis
of SBP to prevent HRS-AKI (I;1).
Acute-on-chronic liver failure
Deﬁnitions and pathophysiology
Since the CANONIC study, the ﬁrst major international observa-
tional study characterising the syndrome of ACLF, 3 a large num-
ber of publications have described the association of this
syndrome with different clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches. ACLF occurs in 30% of admitted patients 3,399 and
in 25% of outpatients, 400 and is a major cause of death in cirrho-
sis, with an approximately 50% mortality rate. 400 Even though
there is an ongoing debate regarding the deﬁnition of
ACLF,401–405 the concept of the development of ACLF is similar
across different continents and health systems. There is agree-
ment that ACLF is not just decompensation of liver cirrhosis,
but a distinct syndrome. 406 The reason is that ACLF is deﬁned
by a multi-organ failure and has a higher short-term mortality
than a ‘‘simple decompensation” of cirrhosis. 3,401,406 The risk
of developing ACLF is higher in outpatients with advanced liver
disease according to the presence of ascites, low mean arterial
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 29
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

pressure or anaemia and with a high MELD score. 400 ACLF devel-
ops on the background of acute decompensation (AD) of cirrho-
sis, but a remarkable number of patients ( /C24 40%) admitted to
hospital developed ACLF on the ﬁrst episode of AD of their liver
disease.
3 Thus, the presence of AD is an important clinical fea-
ture for the diagnosis of ACLF. 3,401,406 The EASL-CLIF Consortium
has proposed and validated a prognostic score (CLIF-C AD score)
for patients with AD who do not develop ACLF 407 The CLIF-C AD
score (Box 1) was proved to be more accurate for predicting out-
come in these patients than the MELD or MELD-Na score. 407
Once developed, ACLF is characterised by hepatic and extrahep-
atic organ dysfunction and/or failure, highly activated systemic
inﬂammation, and a high 28-day mortality.
3,12 The overwhelm-
ing and devasting inﬂammatory response is a key pathogenic
mechanism in the development of ACLF, probably explaining
why ACLF frequently happens in younger patients.
3,401,406,408
The trigger of ACLF and this inﬂammatory response could not
be identiﬁed in 40–50% of the patients in CANONIC study, 3
which might be associated with genetic predisposition, severe
portal hypertension or other factors predisposing the patients
to development of AD and ACLF. 409 However, identiﬁcation of
the precipitating events of AD are of great importance to pre-
vent and manage ACLF.
410,411
Precipitating events
The precipitating events vary between different populations,
geographic areas and aetiologies. While in Western countries
(Europe, North and Latin America) bacterial infection, followed
by active alcohol intake or binge are major precipitating
events,
3,412,413 in Eastern countries (Asia, Paciﬁc region) the
exacerbation of hepatitis B, followed by alcohol or bacterial
infections are the major causes of AD and ACLF develop-
ment.
414–416 But there are a number of other insults, which
might induce ACLF, such as superimposed infection with hepa-
totropic viruses (especially HAV, HEV), DILI, GI bleeding, circula-
tory dysfunction upon different situation ( e.g. surgery, LVP
without albumin). Therefore, in general the precipitating factors
might be differentiated into three major categories, hepatotoxic
injury (active alcohol intake or binge, DILI), immunological
insults (ﬂairs of viral or autoimmune hepatitis, bacterial, fungal
and viral infections, common cold, subclinical infections, etc.)
and haemodynamic derangement following procedures (haem-
orrhage, surgery, LVP).
Bacterial infections
Overall, the major precipitating factor for ACLF is bacterial
infections accounting for 30–57% of cases.
409,410 The importance
of bacterial infections for the development of organ failures and
ACLF was also underlined by the studies of North American Con-
sortium for End-stage Liver Disease (NACSELD), who have
deﬁned ACLF by the development of two organ failures in pres-
ence of bacterial infections.
412 By contrast, bacterial infections
were not considered to be precipitating events for ACLF accord-
ing to the deﬁnition of Asian Paciﬁc Association for the Study of
the Liver (APASL). 402 However, nowadays there is evidence that
bacterial infections are mainly involved in the development of
organ failures and thereby of ACLF in Asia as well.
415,416 In Wes-
tern countries bacterial infections are the precipitating events in
one-third of patients admitted with ACLF and in two-thirds of
patients developing ACLF during follow-up.
3,409,412,413 Based
on these data, preventive and early therapeutic interventions
for the treatment of infections are of major importance to pre-
vent the development of ACLF. The role of bacterial infections
as triggers of AD and development of organ failures has already
been discussed.
Active alcohol intake or binge
Alcoholic liver disease was the most prevalent in patients with
AD and ACLF in the CANONIC study, as well as in recent reports
from India.
415–417 Interestingly, active alcoholism and alcohol
binge were not only a major trigger in these patients, but led
to a more severe syndrome than other triggers in alcoholic cir-
rhosis patients without heavy active alcoholism.
3 The role and
mechanisms of active alcoholism need further investigation,
especially regarding prevention and treatment.
Reactivation and superimposed viral hepatitis
Reactivation of HBV in patients with cirrhosis is the main pre-
cipitating event in the non-Caucasian Asian population, 413,415
occurring mostly in genotypes B and D, and hepatitis B e antigen
positive patients. Interestingly, superimposed HAV and HEV can
also trigger ACLF in 14–18%. 414,416 According to the Western
experience, these are unusual causes. 3,413 However, the role of
HEV might have been overlooked, and might gain more impor-
tance now because of advances in diagnostics and increases in
awareness.3,418 A timely recognition and treatment of the pre-
cipitating event might prevent ACLF and improve outcome in
these patients.
Clinical and diagnostic features of ACLF
As discussed previously, organ failures in the presence of AD of
cirrhosis are the basis for the diagnosis of ACLF. However, in the
CANONIC study the presence and grading of ACLF was based on
mortality and the independent association of organ dysfunc-
tion/failure with mortality, which was chosen to be ≥15% at
28 days.
3 Organ failures were deﬁned based on a sequential
organ failure assessment (SOFA) score, which was adapted to
patients with cirrhosis, the CLIF SOFA score ( Table 9 ). However,
two organs received special attention, the kidney and the brain.
3
In fact, it has been observed that even mild renal or brain dys-
function in the presence of another organ failure, is associated
with a signiﬁcant short-term mortality and therefore deﬁnes
the presence of ACLF. Thus, patients with renal failure, deﬁned
as creatinine ≥2 mg/dl, were classiﬁed as ACLF grade Ia while
patients with a non-renal and non-cerebral organ failure
combined either with mild renal dysfunction (creatinine
between 1.5 and 1.9 mg/dl) and/or grade I and II hepatic
encephalopathy, as well as those with cerebral failure combined
with mild renal dysfunction were classiﬁed as ACLF grade Ib
(Table 10 ).
3 Thereafter, patients with two organ failures are
classiﬁed as grade II ACLF, and have a 28-day mortality rate of
32%. Patients with three or more organ failures are classiﬁed
as grade III ACLF and have an average 28-day mortality of 78%
(Table 9 ). According to this EASL-CLIF deﬁnition of ACLF,
approximately one-quarter of patients admitted to the hospital
Box 1 . CLIF-C Acute Decompensation Score (Ref. 407).
10 x [0.03 x Age + 0.66 x Ln(Creatinine) + 1.71 x Ln(INR) + 
0.88 x Ln(WBC)     0.05 x Sodium + 8]
CLIF-C Acute Decompensation score 
Age in years; creatinine in mg/dl; WBC (white blood count) in 109 cells/L; sodium in mmol/L
Clinical Practice Guidelines
30 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

for AD of cirrhosis had ACLF at admission or develop it during
the hospitalisation. After having simpliﬁed the CLIF SOFA score
into the CLIF Organ Failure score ( Table 11), the EASL-CLIF Con-
sortium formulated a new score, the CLIF-C ACLF score, which
enables the prediction of mortality in patients with ACLF.
419
The CLIF-C ACLF score ( Box 2 ) has been validated by different
independent series of patients. 417,420,421 Other scores were
recently proposed by the APASL ACLF Research Consortium
and by the NACSELD, but they were not compared speciﬁcally
with the CLIF-C-ACLF score. 422,423
Recommendations
/C15 The diagnosis of ACLF should be made in a patient with
cirrhosis and AD (deﬁned as the acute development or
worsening of ascites, overt encephalopathy, GI-haemor-
rhage, non-obstructive jaundice and/or bacterial infec-
tions), when organ failure(s) involving high short-term
mortality develop (II-2;1).
/C15 The diagnosis and the grading of ACLF should be based
on the assessment of organ function as deﬁned by the
CLIF-C Organ Failure score (II-2,1).
/C15 Potential precipitating factor(s), either hepatic ( i.e. heavy
alcohol intake, viral hepatitis, DILI, autoimmune hepati-
tis) and/or extrahepatic ( i.e. infections haemodynamic
derangements following haemorrhage, surgery) should
be investigated. However, in a signiﬁcant proportion of
patients, a precipitant factor may not be identiﬁed
(II-2,1).
Management of ACLF
General management
Unfortunately, there is no speciﬁc effective treatment for
ACLF.
424 Therefore, treatment is currently based on organ sup-
port and management of associated complications. The cause
of liver injury can be speciﬁcally treated only in certain situa-
tions such as in ACLF secondary to HBV infection, as described
Table 9 . CLIF-Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score (adapted from Ref. n /C1763).
The CLIF-Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score
Organ/system 0 1 2 3 4
Liver (bilirubin mg/dl) <1.2 ≥1.2–<2.0 ≥2.0–<6.0 ≥6.0–<12.0 ≥ 12.0
Kidney (creatinine, mg/dl) <1.2 ≥1.2–<2.0 ≥ 2.0–<3.5 ≥3.5–<5.0 ≥5.0
Cerebral (HE grade) No HE Grade I Grade II Grade III Grade IV
Coagulation (INR and PLT count) <1.1 ≥1.1–<1.25 ≥1.25–<1.5 ≥1.5–<2.5 ≥ 2.5 or PLT ≤ 20.000/mm3
Circulation (MAP, mmHg and vasopressors) ≥70 <70 Dopamine ≤5* or
dobutamine or
terlipressin
Dopamine >5* or
E ≤0.1* or NE
≤0.1*
Dopamine >15*
or E >0.1 * or NE
>0.1*
Lungs
PaO2/FiO2,o r
SpO2/FiO2
>400
>512
>300–≤400
>357–≤512
>200–≤300
>214–≤357
>100–≤200
>89- ≤214
≤100
≤89
E, epinephrine; FiO 2, fraction of inspired oxygen; HE, hepatic encephalopathy; NE, norepinephrine; PaO 2, partial pressure of arterial oxygen; SpO 2, pulse oximetric
saturation. The bold text indicates the diagnostic criteria for organ failures.
* lg/kg/min.
Table 10 . Classiﬁcation and grades of ACLF (adapted from Ref. 3).
Grades of
ACLF
Clinical characteristics
No ACLF No organ failure, or single non-kidney organ failure, creatinine
<1.5 mg/dl, no HE
ACLF Ia Single renal failure
ACLF Ib Single non-kidney organ failure, creatinine 1.5–1.9 mg/dl and/
or HE grade 1–2
ACLF II Two organ failures
ACLF III Three or more organ failures
ACLF, acute-on-chronic liver failure; HE, hepatic encephalopathy.
Table 11 . Chronic Liver Failure – Organ Failure score system (adapted from Ref. 419).
Organ/system 1 point 2 points 3 points
Liver Bilirubin <6 mg/dl 6 ≤Bilirubin <12 mg/dl Bilirubin ≥12 mg/dl
Kidney Creatinine <2 mg/dl 2 Creatinine <3.5 mg/dl Creatinine ≥3.5 mg/dl or renal replacement
Brain/HE (West Haven criteria) Grade 0 Grades 1–2 Grades 3-4 a
Coagulation INR <2.0 2.0 ≤INR <2.5 INR ≥2.5
Circulation MAP ≥70 mmHg MAP <70 mmHg Use of vasopressors
Lungs PaO 2/FiO2 >300,
or
SpO2/FiO2 >357
PaO2/FiO2 ≤300–>200,
or
SpO2/FiO2 >214–≤357
PaO2/FiO2 ≤200b
or
SpO2/FiO2 ≤214b
Note: The bold text denotes criteria for diagnosing organ failures.
FIO2, fraction of inspired oxygen; HE, hepatic encephalopathy; INR, international normalized ratio; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PaO 2, partial pressure of arterial oxygen;
SpO2, pulse oximetric saturation.
a Patients submitted to mechanical ventilation due to HE and not to a respiratory failure were considered as presenting a cerebral failure (cerebral sc ore = 3).
b Other patients enrolled in the study with mechanical ventilation were considered as presenting a respiratory failure (respiratory score = 3).
Box 2 . CLIF-C Acute Liver Failure (ACLF) score (Ref. 419).
10 x [0.033 x Clif OFs + 0.04 x Age + 0.63 x Ln(WBC)    2]
Age in years; CLIF OF score as in Table 10; sodium in mmol/L
CLIF-C ACLF score
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 31
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

later. Patients with ACLF should ideally be admitted to intensive
care or intermediate care units, yet this decision should be indi-
vidualised based on certain factors, particularly patients’ age
and associated comorbidities. Moreover, patients suitable for
LT should be referred to a transplant centre early in the course
of ACLF. Late referral may make transplantation impossible due
to the rapid evolution of ACLF in most patients.
425 In patients in
whom ACLF is associated with precipitating factors, such as bac-
terial infections, GI bleeding, or drug toxicity, early identiﬁca-
tion and management of these conditions is crucial to patient
survival. Nonetheless, it should be emphasised that this early
treatment of triggering factors may not prevent the progression
of ACLF in all patients. Meanwhile, as already stated, in approx-
imately half of patients with ACLF a precipitating factor cannot
be identiﬁed.
3 Organ support is very important in the manage-
ment of patients with ACLF. 424 Haemodynamic function should
be monitored and vasopressor therapy administered in case of
marked arterial hypotension. Hepatic encephalopathy should
be treated early with standard therapy. Special care should be
taken to preserve airway patency to prevent aspiration pneu-
monia. In patients with coagulation failure, either because of
impairment of coagulation factors or low platelet count, substi-
tutive therapy should be given only if there is clinically signiﬁ-
cant bleeding. If there is respiratory failure, patients should be
given oxygen therapy and ventilation, if required. Finally, if
there is kidney failure its cause should be identiﬁed and man-
aged accordingly. Volume expansion should be given to patients
with ﬂuid loss or in the setting of SBP. Excessive volume expan-
sion should be avoided. Patients meeting the criteria of AKI-HRS
should be treated with terlipressin and albumin or nore-
pinephrine, if terlipressin is not available. Patients with sus-
pected ATN should be treated with RRT if they meet criteria
for this treatment.
392
Speciﬁc therapies
Liver support systems. Extracorporeal liver support systems, par-
ticularly albumin dialysis (MARS system) and fractionated
plasma separation and adsorption (Prometheus system) have
been evaluated as therapies for ACLF. These systems remove
albumin-bound substances and other substances that accumu-
late in the context of ACLF and may have deleterious effects
on the function of different organs. Both methods have been
evaluated in large RCTs in patients with ACLF and no signiﬁcant
effects on survival could be demonstrated.
388,389 It should be
emphasised however, that the deﬁnition of ACLF in both trials
was different than the current deﬁnition of ACLF based on the
CANONIC study.
3 Moreover, a sub-analysis of the Prometheus
study showed a beneﬁcial effect on survival in patients with
MELD score higher than 30. 389 This ﬁnding deserves further
investigation. Nonetheless, based on the results of available
RCTs, extracorporeal liver support systems do not improve sur-
vival of patients with ACLF and should not be recommended in
this indication.
Antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis B
. Reactivation of hepatitis
B is a very common cause of ACLF in certain areas of the world,
particularly in southwest Asia. 414 A number of non-randomised
studies and an RCT have shown that treatment with lamivudine,
tenofovir or entecavir is associated with inhibition of HBV repli-
cation, improvement of liver function, and higher survival in
patients with ACLF secondary to hepatitis B infection.
426–429
The only RCT included 24 patients, 14 treated with tenofovir
and 13 treated with placebo, and showed signiﬁcant differences
in three-month survival (57% vs. 15%, respectively). 426 There-
fore, it seems evident that the presence of HBV infection should
be investigated in all patients with ACLF and antiviral therapy
should be started as soon as possible.
Other therapies
. A number of therapies have been assessed in
patients with ACLF, including dexamethasone, plasma
exchange, chinese herbs, caspase inhibitors, mesenchymal stem
cells transplantation, and administration of granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor (G-CSF).
430–432 In most cases, the information
is still very preliminary and no recommendations can be made
regarding their potential use in clinical practice. However, a
note on G-CSF seems pertinent because this approach has been
assessed in an RCT.
432 The rationale behind this treatment
seems to be the mobilisation of stem cells from the bone mar-
row and their engraftment within the liver, although other ben-
eﬁcial effects may also occur. The only RCT evaluating this
therapy included 47 patients with ACLF, as deﬁned by the APASL
criteria, 23 treated with G-CSF (12 doses of 5
lg/kg subcuta-
neously) and 24 treated with placebo in a double-blind manner.
The main ﬁndings were an improvement in 60-day survival in
the G-CSF group vs. the placebo group (66% vs. 26%, respec-
tively; p = 0.001) along with a reduction in Child-Pugh, SOFA,
and MELD scores and a decrease in the occurrence of HRS, hep-
atic encephalopathy and sepsis in G-CSF treated patients.
Although these results are promising, additional studies in a lar-
ger number of patients are needed.
Liver transplantation
. Liver transplantation is theoretically the
deﬁnitive treatment for ACLF because it allows the cure of ACLF
syndrome as well as the underlying liver disease.
425 However,
some important issues regarding LT for ACLF deserve a com-
ment, particularly the accessibility of patients to LT, evaluation
of candidate subjects, the outcomes of LT on survival, and futility.
The accessibility of patients with ALCF to LT is probably
decreased compared to that of patients with other indications
for LT, because patients with ACLF have a high mortality rate
after diagnosis of the condition. Early referral to transplant cen-
tres is therefore crucial. Then, because ACLF is a rapidly evolving
syndrome, candidate patients need to be submitted to a ‘‘fast-
track” clinical evaluation of organ function and potential comor-
bidities that could contraindicate LT. Data on outcome of
patients with ACLF treated with liver LT are scarce but nonethe-
less, patient survival at three-months after LT is about 80%,
much higher than what would be anticipated if patients were
not transplanted.
425,433,434 Almost all patients with ACLF-3
developed complications after LT, especially pulmonary, renal
and infectious, compared to patients with no ACLF, or ACLF-1
and -2. This emphasises the need for special management when
transplanting patients with ACLF-3, with repeated systematic
screening for infection and careful monitoring of renal and res-
piratory parameters.
434 Another point is that some patients
with ACLF are potentially too sick for LT. In the context of scar-
city of donor livers, the potential beneﬁt of LT for patients with
ACLF must be balanced with the rationing. Thus, more data is
needed to determine medical futility in patients with
ALCF.
425,434 However, if LT is contraindicated or not available
for patients with organ failures ≥4 or CLIF-C ACLFs >64 at days
3–7 after diagnosis of ACLF-3, the intensive organ support
should be discontinued owing to futility. 425
Clinical Practice Guidelines
32 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Recommendations
/C15 At present, there is no speciﬁc therapy for ACLF aside
from antiviral therapy in patients with ACLF due to reac-
tivation of HBV infection. Treatment of ACLF should be
based on organ support and management of precipitants
(see point below) and associated complications. Patients
should be treated in intermediate care or intensive care
settings. Organ function, particularly, liver, kidney, brain,
lung, coagulation, and circulation should be monitored
frequently and carefully throughout hospitalisation, as
ACLF is a dynamic condition. However, monitoring and
management should be individualised according to
speciﬁc circumstances, mainly patients’ age and comor-
bidities (III, 1) .
/C15 Early identiﬁcation and treatment of precipitating fac-
tors of ACLF, particularly bacterial infections, are recom-
mended. However, in some patients ACLF progresses
despite treatment of precipitating factors (III;1).
/C15 Administration of nucleoside analogues (tenofovir, ente-
cavir) should be instituted as early as possible in patients
with ACLF due to HBV infection (I;1).
/C15 Early referral of patients with ACLF to liver transplant
centres for immediate evaluation is recommended(II-3;1).
/C15 Withdrawal of ongoing intensive care support can be
suggested in patients, who are not candidates for LT,
with four or more organ failures after one week of ade-
quate intensive treatment (II-2, 2) .
/C15 Despite promising results, the administration of G-CSF
can not be recommended at present (1;2).
Relative adrenal insufﬁciency
Deﬁnition and pathophysiology
Relative adrenal insufﬁciency (RAI) is a condition of inadequate
cortisol response to stress in the setting of critical illness, 435 also
named as ‘‘Critical Illness Related Corticosteroid Insufﬁciency”
(CIRCI).
436 RAI has also been described in patients with cirrhosis
and, although it is mainly present in critically ill patients with
sepsis or septic shock (68.9%), it also affects non-critically ill cir-
rhotic patients (41.8%), including those with compensated cir-
rhosis.
437–442 The pathophysiology of RAI in cirrhosis is not
well deﬁned. Suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal
axis activity, reduced effective volemia, which may impair adre-
nal perfusion, and both impaired cholesterol synthesis and
enhanced pro-inﬂammatory cytokine production likely con-
tribute to impair adrenal steroidogenesis.
443,444 Adrenal dys-
function blunts the vascular effect of angiotensin II,
norepinephrine and vasopressin, leading to further sympathetic
nervous system activity. 445 These effects would worsen the car-
dio-circulatory dysfunction of advanced cirrhosis, and favour
gut bacterial overgrowth, and hence BT, by impairing intestinal
motility.445 This explains why RAI in decompensated cirrhosis is
associated with a higher probability of severe sepsis and type-1
HRS, and higher short-term mortality. 437,446
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of RAI is inﬂuenced by the method employed, as
the measurement of serum total cortisol, either at baseline or
after stimulation by the standard dose- or low dose-short Syn-
acthen tests can be utilised. 447 The consensus statements from
the American College of Critical Care Medicine recommend
referring to a delta total serum cortisol <250 nmol/L (9
lg/dl)
after adrenocorticotrophic hormone administration or a random
total cortisol <276 nmol/L (10 lg/dl) in critically ill patients. 436
There is no reason for not employing these indications in
patients with cirrhosis. However, the diagnosis of RAI based
on serum total cortisol concentration, which is measured by
standard assays, may be ﬂawed by the reduced serum levels
of cortisol binding globulin (CBG) and albumin frequently seen
in patients with cirrhosis. This may lead to an overestimation
of RAI, as more than 90% of circulating cortisol is bound to these
proteins.
448 The assessment of serum-free cortisol concentra-
tion would overcome this limitation. Serum-free cortisol levels
<50 nmol/L at baseline, or <86 nmol/L (9
lg/dl) after adrenocor-
ticotrophic hormone suggest the presence of RAI in critically ill
patients.449 By comparing RAI diagnosis in clinically stable
patients with cirrhosis based on either total or free plasma cor-
tisol, a clear discrepancy emerged, as the prevalence of RAI was
58% using total cortisol criteria and 12% using free cortisol with
a peak plasma level <33 nmol/ after stimulation.
450 Unfortu-
nately, the methods for determining free cortisol are complex
and expensive, so they are not used in routine clinical practice.
The surrogate methods that have been proposed for the calcula-
tion of plasma free cortisol
451,452 do not seem to be fully reliable
in patients with cirrhosis. 450 For these reasons, salivary cortisol
has received attention, as it correlates with free cortisol levels
irrespective of the concentration of binding proteins.
453,454
Baseline salivary cortisol <1.8 ng/ml (<0.18 lg/dl) or an incre-
ment <3 ng/ml (0.3 lg/dl)453 following a standard-dose short
Synacthen test are suggestive of RAI. However, even the evalu-
ation of salivary cortisol is not without shortcomings.
454
Recommendation
/C15 Diagnosis of RAI should be based on a delta serum total
cortisol after 250 lg corticotropin injection of <248
nmol/L (9 lg/dl) or a random total cortisol of <276
nmol/L (<10 lg/dl) (II-2,1). As serum free cortisol con-
centration can be inﬂuenced by the reduced serum levels
of CBG and albumin frequently seen in patients with cir-
rhosis, salivary cortisol determination can be preferred
(II-2;2).
Treatment of relative adrenal insufﬁciency
It is not known whether cortisol supplementation in clinically
stable cirrhosis with RAI is of any value. Two studies have eval-
uated the effects of treating RAI in critically ill patients with cir-
rhosis. In one study 17 patients with cirrhosis and sepsis, in
whom RAI was diagnosed, received i.v. hydrocortisone (50 mg/
6h), and were compared with 50 consecutive patients with cir-
rhosis and septic shock who had previously been admitted to
the same ICU but did not receive steroids. A higher rate of shock
resolution, survival in the ICU and hospital survival were seen in
the patients treated with hydrocortisone.
455 In the second
study, 57 patients with cirrhosis, septic shock and RAI were ran-
domised to receive either i.v. 50 mg of hydrocortisone or normal
saline every 6 h until haemodynamic stability was achieved, fol-
lowed by steroid tapering over eight days. Lower vasopressor
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 33
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

doses and higher rates of shock reversal were seen in patients
who received hydrocortisone. However, 28-day mortality did
not differ between the two groups. Moreover, shock relapse
and GI bleeding occurred more often in the hydrocortisone
group.
456
Recommendation
/C15 At present, hydrocortisone treatment (at a dose of 50
mg/6h) of RAI cannot be recommended (I-2).
Cardiopulmonary complications
Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy
Deﬁnition and pathophysiology
Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy (CCM) refers to chronic cardiac dys-
function in a patient with established cirrhosis, characterised
by a blunted contractile response to stress (pharmacologi-
cal/surgical or inﬂammatory) and an altered diastolic relaxation,
often associated with electrophysiological abnormalities such as
prolongation of the QTc interval. These phenomena occur in the
absence of any other cardiac disease.
457 Systemic inﬂammation
is thought to be key in inducing myocardial dysfunction associ-
ated with impaired diastolic relaxation and decreased left ven-
tricular ejection fraction, however, there are few controlled
studies.
193,458,459 Shear stress generated by portal hypertension
exhibiting mechanical forces on myocardial ﬁbres, may also
play a part. 460 CCM is largely subclinical but its presence does
inﬂuence prognosis in advanced disease, 461 and it certainly
impacts on the course of interventions such as TIPS and LT. 462
Diagnosis
Characterisation of systolic dysfunction in cirrhotic
cardiomyopathy
Systolic dysfunction refers to impaired left ventricle contractile
responses to stress on echo, translating to a resting left ventric-
ular ejection fraction (LVEF) <55%. For most patients with cirrho-
sis, the resting systolic function is normal or even increased, due
to the hyperdynamic circulation and reduced afterload to main-
tain cardiac output. To investigate systolic dysfunction in cirrho-
sis, it is necessary to induce circulatory stress either
pharmacologically or through exercise. Systolic dysfunction then
manifests as a lack of an appropriate left ventricular contractile
response to the applied stress. As disease advances, the progres-
sive reduction in peripheral vascular resistance unmasks systolic
dysfunction. Early studies used exercise stress testing to demon-
strate a lack of increment in cardiac output or LVEF
463,464 and
this was even shown when noradrenaline levels were increased,
suggesting loss of sympathetic responsiveness.
465 More recent
studies used pharmacological stress echo to show a blunted
response.466 However, other studies using cardiac MRI, have
shown normal chronotropic and inotropic responses suggesting
the techniques used may give rise to variability. 467
Myocardial strain imaging for assessing systolic dysfunction
Myocardial strain imaging is a more recent echocardiographic
technique evaluating the degree of shortening of myocardial
muscle ﬁbres (‘strain’) inﬂuencing cardiac wall motion. The
measurement of left ventricular global longitudinal systolic
strain (GLS) is believed to be a sensitive marker of left ventric-
ular systolic function and facilitates the assessment of systolic
dysfunction at rest,
468,469 as well as having prognostic impor-
tance in heart failure. 470 Studies of strain imaging in cirrhosis
have demonstrated variable results; some showing impaired
systolic strain in patients compared with healthy controls, albeit
with no correlation to Child-Pugh score. 471,472 Others demon-
strate systolic strain within normal range and not inﬂuenced
by the presence of ascites. 473,474 However, interestingly, when
patients undergo LT, the systolic strain improves. 471
Characterisation of diastolic dysfunction in cirrhotic
cardiomyopathy
Numerous echocardiographic criteria along with transmitral
Doppler evaluation have been used to characterise diastolic dys-
function including, early diastolic/atrial ﬁlling ratio (E/A), early
diastolic ﬁlling/mitral annular velocity (E/e’) and tricuspid sys-
tolic jet velocity. Such measurements are inﬂuenced by the
pre- and afterload changes of portal hypertension. The latest
American Society of Echocardiography (ASE) and European
Association of Cardiovascular Imaging guidelines for the evalu-
ation of diastolic dysfunction recommend the following criteria
based on a normal LVEF (often the case in cirrhosis):
475
i. Average E/e’>14
ii. Septal e’ velocity <7 cm/s OR Lateral e’ velocity <10 cm/s
iii. Tricuspid velocity >2.8 m/s
iv. Left atrial volume index (LAVI) >34 ml/m 2
Diastolic dysfunction translates to impaired relaxation of the
left ventricle, abnormal ﬁlling of the left atrium, and a higher
left atrial volume. Indeed, increased LAVI has been associated
with greater risk of heart failure in ischaemic cardiac disease.
476
Based on these guidelines, diastolic dysfunction is classiﬁed as:
grade I if one of the three principle criteria (1,3 and 4 above) are
met; and grade II if two or more of the criteria are met.
However, there is heterogeneity in descriptions of the preva-
lence of diastolic dysfunction in cirrhosis, in part reﬂecting the
different echo techniques and/or diagnostic criteria applied,
and the inﬂuence of vasoactive agents such as beta-blockers
and terlipressin.
Several studies using an E/A ratio of ≤1 criteria have demon-
strated left atrial enlargement in patients with ascites and
advanced disease.
464,477 Therapeutic paracentesis improves E/A
ratio and importantly, in all studies, there is no relation to aetiol-
ogy.478 In patients treated with TIPS there was no relation to aeti-
ology, but diastolic dysfunction does show a positive correlation
with higher MELD scores.
462,479 A further study using E/e’ ratio to
deﬁne diastolic dysfunction in patients with ascites and elevated
plasma renin, demonstrated that an increased E/e’ was an inde-
pendent predictor of development of HRS type 1 and one-year
mortality.
480 By contrast, other studies fail to show a clear rela-
tionship with disease severity or survival, 460,472,481 albeit in two
studies echo criteria are not speciﬁed. 460,472 Studies using the
LAVI criteria suggest a closer association between left atrial
enlargement and Child-Pugh C disease. 482
Newer techniques such as cardiac MRI with ‘T1 mapping’ and
Late Gadolinium enhancement are being deployed to assess
whether ﬁbrosis or oedema modulates myocardial function in
conditions such as amyloid and Fabry disease. 483 Literature on
using such techniques in liver disease are very limited. A recent
study in patients with chronic hepatitis C showed no signiﬁcant
differences in echo parameters to controls, but demonstrated
Clinical Practice Guidelines
34 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

lower post-contrast myocardial T1 time and higher partition
coefﬁcients, indicative of diffuse myocardial ﬁbrosis. 484
Natural history
Impact of disease related physiological stress: sepsis,
decompensation and/or GI bleeding
There are limited studies of cardiac assessment during acute cir-
rhosis decompensation and associated haemodynamic instabil-
ity. In a seminal study of acute cirrhosis decompensation with
SBP, a subgroup with HRS were shown to have lower cardiac
outputs at diagnosis and this correlated inversely with high
inﬂammatory indices.
193 A follow-on study by the same group
identiﬁed that patients with HRS had cardiac outputs that were
further reduced at follow-up, compared to patients who do not
develop HRS after SBP, and these patients had higher plasma
noradrenaline and renin.
485 Other studies recapitulate this with
a demonstration of reduced kidney blood ﬂow and importantly,
suggest those with low cardiac index, also have increased
mortality.
192,485
In relation to systemic inﬂammation and sepsis, one study
showed lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP) levels (a sur-
rogate for BT and lipopolysaccharide) in patients with ascites
to be associated with signiﬁcant diastolic dysfunction and left
atrial enlargement. The E/e’ ratio in these patients correlated
with LBP levels. This data supports ﬁndings from experimental
studies, which have shown a role for inﬂammation, signalling
through the inﬂammasome and macrophage activation, as key
pathological processes related to myocardial dysfunction.
486–488
Acute GI bleeding in cirrhosis is understandably associated
with signiﬁcant haemodynamic disturbances and has not been
studied systematically in relation to cardiac function. Data
assessing chronotropic function suggest the QTc interval is
increased in cirrhotic patients during an acute bleeding episode
compared to non-cirrhotic patients, and that this is associated
with higher MELD scores and independently predicts sur-
vival.
489 This contrasts with a more recent study that fails to
demonstrate a clear link between QTc prolongation and mortal-
ity.490 Possible reasons for this heterogeneity in outcomes are
the variable nature of vasoactive agents and their respective
doses required for the control of bleeding in these studies. For
example, one study showed terlirpessin decreased cardiac out-
put by 17% and the reduction in wall motion after terlipressin
correlated with the Child-Pugh score.
491
Impact of interventions on cirrhotic cardiomyopathy
TIPS. Cardiac reserve is a major clinical consideration for elective
TIPS placement and a 2D echo to assess LVEF is standard prac-
tice. Despite this, some patients do have cardiac decompensa-
tion post TIPS insertion. Several studies show an association
between presence of diastolic dysfunction at the time of TIPS
and poor survival.
462,479 By contrast, others have not shown
any difference in survival between patients with and without
diastolic dysfunction at the time of TIPS.
492 However, uniformly,
studies suggest an increase in left ventricular and atrial volume
over time, implying that such patients may be at greater risk of
future heart failure, based on literature for ischaemic heart dis-
ease and dilated cardiomyopathy.
476,493
Liver transplantation. Just as data on the effects of cirrhosis com-
plications on cardiac function are variable, data on the impact of
the physiological stress of LT on patients with pre-existing car-
diac dysfunction is heterogenous, largely because of the differ-
ent echo criteria and thresholds applied.
One study in 173 transplant recipients assessed systolic
(resting ejection fraction <55%) and diastolic (E/A ratio <1 or a
deceleration time >200 ms) dysfunction and reported it occur-
ring in 2% and 43% of patients, respectively. Whilst patients with
diastolic dysfunction were older, interestingly, outcomes were
not inﬂuenced by the presence of diastolic dysfunction.
494 By
contrast, another study used echo and brain natriuretic peptide
(BNP) levels to grade severity of cardiac dysfunction. Those
patients with higher BNP levels (>391) on day one tended to
have higher mortality and longer dialysis requirements post
transplantation. Of these, a subset with BNP levels >567 had
ejection fractions <50%, and some of these died of cardiogenic
shock within 72 h post-transplant. Autopsy in these patients
showed diffuse myocardial ﬁbrosis. In the main, BNP levels
tended to decrease towards normal values over a week.
495
A further study performed a detailed echo assessment,
including myocardial strain assessment with speckle tracking,
in patients undergoing LT compared to non-transplanted
patients over a median follow-up of 18 months. Whilst patients
pre-transplant had increased left ventricular mass and diastolic
dysfunction, following transplantation, there was a signiﬁcant
improvement in systolic strain and reduced left ventricular
mass. Conversely, cirrhosis patients who were not transplanted
had an increase in left ventricular mass, albeit systolic strain did
not change signiﬁcantly.
471 This implies that some of the patho-
physiological changes in CCM, such as increased left ventricular
mass and size, are reversible with resolution of the disease.
However, studies with comprehensive characterisation of car-
diac function post transplantation are limited.
Prognosis for cirrhotic cardiomyopathy
Data relating cardiac dysfunction (especially diastolic dysfunc-
tion) with survival is variable. Some prospective studies, despite
detailed evaluation of patients, including those with ascites and
using speckle tracking, show no relation between cardiac dys-
function and survival, even among more decompensated
patients.
473,496 Many of the patients in these studies have evi-
dence of diastolic dysfunction and some with even advanced
grade II diastolic dysfunction albeit the GLS values in these
studies are within the normal range.
Conversely, other studies suggest an association between
presence of diastolic dysfunction and higher two-year mortality,
with diastolic dysfunction ranging from 38–67%, especially in
patients with severe ascites.
461,497 Indeed, in one such study, a
multivariate analysis showed left ventricular diastolic dysfunc-
tion was an independent predictor of mortality. 461 Another
study followed 80 patients to assess one-year mortality, ﬁnding
46% had diastolic dysfunction on echo criteria and about half of
these had grade II dysfunction, in whom mean arterial blood
pressure was lower and MELD score higher than grade I
patients. The presence of diastolic dysfunction was associated
with a higher degree of ascites and plasma renin levels and
38% of these patients developed criteria for HRS type I. Survival
was 95% in those without diastolic dysfunction, compared to
79% in those with grade I dysfunction and 39% with grade II
diastolic dysfunction. E/e’ ratio was an independent predictor
of survival.
480
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 35
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Recommendations
/C15 Evaluation of cirrhosis patients with echocardiography
should be performed with dynamic stress testing either
pharmacologically, or through exercise, given that sys-
tolic dysfunction may be masked by the hyperdynamic
circulation and reduced afterload. Failure to increment
cardiac output after physiological/pharmacological
stress (and in the absence of inﬂuence of beta-blockade)
indicates systolic dysfunction (II-1;1).
/C15 Myocardial strain imaging and assessment of GLS may
serve as a sensitive marker of left ventricular systolic
function and facilitate its assessment at rest and in
decompensated patients (II-2;2). Cardiac MRI may also
identify structural changes. However, with all these
techniques, there is the need for more controlled studies
and correlation with clinical endpoints (III;2).
/C15 Diastolic dysfunction may occur as an early sign of car-
diomyopathy in the setting of normal systolic function,
and should be diagnosed using the recent ASE guideli-
nes, namely: Average E/e’>14; Tricuspid velocity >2.8
m/s and LAVI >34 ml/m
2 (II-1;1).
/C15 In patients with AD of cirrhosis, reduced cardiac output
(as a manifestation of CCM) is of prognostic signiﬁcance
as it is associated with the development of AKI (speciﬁ-
cally hepatorenal dysfunction) after infections such as
SBP (II-1;1).
/C15 Prolongation of the QTc interval is common in cirrhosis
and can be evaluated since it may indicate a poor out-
come. Agents that can prolong the QT interval should
be used cautiously (II-2;2).
/C15 Detailed functional cardiac characterisation should be
part of the assessment for TIPS insertion (II-2;2) or LT
(II-1;1).
/C15 Standardized criteria and protocols for the assessment of
systolic and diastolic function in cirrhosis are needed
(II-2;2).
Hepato-pulmonary syndrome
Deﬁnitions and clinical manifestations
The association of chronic liver disease with respiratory symp-
toms and hypoxia is well recognised. Four main pulmonary
complications may occur in patients with chronic liver disease:
pneumonia, hepatic hydrotorax, HPS and PPHT. HPS is deﬁned
as a disorder in pulmonary oxygenation, caused by intrapul-
monary vasodilatation and, less commonly, by pleural and pul-
monary arteriovenous communications occurring in the clinical
setting of portal hypertension.
498,499 It is most commonly
diagnosed in patients with cirrhosis 498,499 and portal hyperten-
sion500 but, it has also been described in patients with pre-hepatic
portal hypertension, 501 with venous obstruction but without
cirrhosis, and even in patients with acute or chronic hepatitis 500
(Table 12 ). A severe impairment of liver function and a speciﬁc
aetiology of liver disease are not needed for the development of
HPS,
498 based on the proﬁles of the patients studied. In terms of
prevalence, HPS has been reported in 10% of patients with
chronic viral hepatitis in 15–23% of those with cirrhosis and
in 28% of those with Budd-Chiari syndrome.
502–504 However,
the prevalence of HPS reported in patients with cirrhosis
undergoing LT evaluation ranges from 5–32%, 504–508 while
intrapulmonary vascular dilatation (IPVD) can be detected by
echocardiography in 50–60% of cirrhosis patients undergoing
LT evaluation. No relationship seems to exist between HPS
and CCM.
504 The clinical manifestations of HPS in patients
with chronic liver disease primarily involve dyspnoea and
platypnoea.498,502,506 Dyspnoea is the most common respiratory
complaint in patients with HPS, but it is non-speciﬁc. Its onset is
insidious, usually occurring on exertion. Platypnoea, which is a
shortness of breath exacerbated by sitting up and improved by
lying supine, is a less sensitive but a more speciﬁc ﬁnding in
these patients. Hypoxemia with exertion or at rest is common
and it is exacerbated in the upright position (orthodeoxia).
There are no signs or hallmarks of HPS on physical examination.
However, tachypnoea and polypnoea, digital clubbing and/or
cyanosis in patients with the hallmarks of chronic liver disease
suggest the presence of HPS.
498,502,506
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of HPS is characterised by an IPVD occur-
ring within the pulmonary arterial circulation. This vascular
abnormality consists of diffuse or localised abnormal dilated
pulmonary capillaries and, less commonly, pleural and pul-
monary arteriovenous communications,
509 which result in
impaired oxygenation of venous blood as it passes through
the pulmonary circulation. IPVD impairs ventilatory/perfusion
(V/Q) ratio and may result in anatomic and functional shunt
leading to hypoxaemia ( Fig. 10). In patients with advanced liver
cirrhosis this leads to a subtle increase in intrapulmonary blood
shunting, which is more pronounced in patients with HPS. The
consequent increase of shunting and V/Q mismatch in the
Table 12 . Diagnostic criteria of hepatopulmonary syndrome.
Hypoxia with partial pressure of oxygen <80 mmHg or alveolar–arterial oxygen gradient ≥15 mmHg in ambient air ( ≥20 mmHg in patients older than
65 years).
Pulmonary vascular defect with positive ﬁndings on contrast-enhanced echocardiography or abnormal uptake in the brain (>6%) with radioactive
lung-perfusion scanning
Commonly in presence of portal hypertension, and in particular:
- hepatic portal hypertension with underlying cirrhosis
- pre-hepatic or hepatic portal hypertension in patients without underlying cirrhosis
Less commonly in presence of:
- acute liver failure, chronic hepatitis
All criteria were determined by means of positive contrast-enhanced echocardiography ( i.e., microbubble opaciﬁcation of the left heart chambers three to six cycles after
right atrial passage). The abbreviated formula for the alveolar–arterial gradient is as follows: PaO 2 /C0 PaO2 = (FIO2 [Patm–PH2O] /C0 [PaCO2/0.8]) /C0 PaO2, where PaO 2 denotes
partial pressure of alveolar oxygen, PaO 2 partial pressure of arterial oxygen, FIO 2 fraction of inspired oxygen, Patm atmospheric pressure, PH 2O partial pressure of water
vapor at body temperature, and PaCO 2 partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (0.8 corresponds to the standard gas-exchange respiratory ratio at rest); the normal range
is 4 to 8 mmHg.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
36 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

upright position is the cause of the orthodeoxia. 510 The patho-
genesis of IPVD is probably multifactorial ( Fig. 11 ). The release
of nitric oxide, which is a potent vasodilator, plays a critical role
in the development of HPS. The increased release of nitric oxide
in the pulmonary circulation is related to an increased expres-
sion and activity of two isoforms of nitric oxide synthase
(NOS), the endothelial NOS (eNOS) and the inducible NOS
(iNOS).
511–516 Meanwhile, BT and the BT-related endotoxaemia
and pro-inﬂammatory response also contribute to the accumu-
lation of macrophages in the pulmonary microvasculature.
517
Endothelial activation of fractalkine (CX3CL1), a chemokine, in
the lung may favour the adherence of monocytes in the pul-
monary microcirculation.
518 Monocytes express iNOS and pro-
duce heme oxygenase-1, leading to increased carbon
monoxide production, further enhancing vasodilatation. 519
CX3CL1 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) A, pro-
duced by circulating monocytes, also contribute to angiogene-
sis, recently recognised as a further pathogenetic factor of
pulmonary IPVD in experimental HPS.
520–522 A downregulation
of miRNA-199 a-5p has recently been described as a contribu-
tory mechanism of pulmonary microvascular endothelial cell
proliferation and thus pathogenesis of HPS.
523 Polymorphisms
in genes involved in the regulation of angiogenesis have also
been associated with the risk of HPS in patients with cirrho-
sis
524 (Fig. 11 ). Finally, it has recently been observed that rosu-
vastatin, by down-regulating protein expression of nuclear
factor kappa B and VEGF-1,2 and Rho-associated A kinase,
may improve the intrapulmonary angiogenesis and the
alveolar-arterial oxygen pressure gradient in common bile duct
ligation rats.
525
Diagnosis
In patients with portal hypertension and the clinical suspicion
of HPS partial pressure of oxygen (PaO 2) in arterial blood gas
(ABG) should be assessed. A PaO 2 lower than 80 mmHg and or
an alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient (P[A-a]O 2) ≥15 mmHg
while breathing ambient air at sea level should lead to further
investigations ( Table 12 ). For adults ≥65 years a P[A-a]O 2 ≥20
mmHg cut-off is used. 526 However, it should be highlighted that
although these criteria are well established, enabling one to
unify the diagnostic methods and thus to better understand
the disease, they are based on a consensus of experts. Pulse
oximetry indirectly measures oxygen saturation (SpO
2), it is
non-invasive and may be useful in the diagnosis of HPS in adults
since a SpO
2 <96% was found to be highly sensitive (100%) and
speciﬁc (88%) for detecting HPS in patients with a PaO 2 <70
Normal HPS
Alveol
Capillary
8µ
500 µ
O2 O2
Fig. 10. The pathophysiology of hepatopulmonary syndrome (adapted
from Ref. 498). HPS, hepatopulmonary syndrome.
• Hepatic injury/failure
• Portal hypertension
• Portosystemic shunt
• Hyperdynamic circulation
• Bacterial translocation
Increased release of 
ET-1
Systemic 
inflammation
HEPATOPULMONARY
SYNDROME
ETB
receptor
Increased expression and
activity of eNOS
Increased release of 
NO
Endothelial cell
Recruitment of
macrophages
in the lungs 
Increased expression and
activity of iNOS and HO
Increased release of 
NO and CO
Endothelial cell
Macrophage
Endothelial activation of
CX3CL1 
Increased adherence of
macrophages/monocytes to
endothelial cells
VFG-A release
Endothelial cell
Endothelial cell
proliferation
VASODILATION VASODILATION
ANGIOGENESIS
Pulmonary capillary
CX3CL1 
Genetic factors
Fig. 11. The pathogenesis of hepatopulmonary syndrome. ET, endothelin; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; NO,
nitric oxide; HO, Heme oxygenase-1; CO, carbon monoxide; CX3CL1, fractalkine; VGF-A, vascular endothelial growth factor A.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 37
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

mmHg, limiting ABG testing to only 14% of patients. 527 The
validity of this non-invasive approach was not conﬁrmed,
recently, in paediatric patients with HPS.
528 Serial SpO 2 mea-
surements may be useful to monitor impaired oxygenation over
time in patients with HPS. The ABG is essential for the staging of
the severity of HPS. HPS can be categorised as mild (PaO 2 ≥80
mmHg), moderate (PaO 2 60–79 mmHg), severe (PaO 2 50–59
mmHg), and very severe (PaO 2 <50 mmHg).498,500,501,503
Recently, it has been observed that HPS is associated with ele-
vated von Willenbrand factor antigen (vWF-Ag) levels. Thus,
vWF-Ag has been proposed as a potentially useful screening tool
for early detection of HPS, but further studies are needed to val-
idate it.
529 The chest X ray is usually non-speciﬁc, nevertheless,
it can be used to effectively rule out other concomitant pul-
monary diseases since only a mild interstitial pattern in the
lower part of the lungs may be found, because of pulmonary
vasodilatation.
498,500,501,503 A decrease in the single-breath dif-
fusing capacity for carbon monoxide is the only alteration of
the routine pulmonary function test that is frequently and con-
sistently abnormal in patients with HPS. However, it is not
speciﬁc and it may not normalise after LT.
498,500,501,503 All the
other respiratory function tests are non-speciﬁc, showing nor-
mal or reduced forced vital capacity or maximum forced expira-
tory volume during the ﬁrst second (FEV1). Thus, they can only
be used to rule out other concomitant pulmonary diseases. Tho-
racic CT scans have also been proposed as a complementary
technique to rule out another underlying pulmonary pathol-
ogy,
498,499 although there is little information regarding their
speciﬁc role in the diagnosis of HPS. It has been suggested that
thoracic CT scans can be useful to measure the calibre of the
peripheral arteries and the bronchial/arterial relationship.
530,531
Furthermore, CT scanning makes it possible to deﬁne the vascu-
lar pattern of HPS in a similar manner to arteriography by
detecting pleural and pulmonary arteriovenous communica-
tions. Contrast-enhanced transthoracic echocardiography with
saline (shaken to produce microbubbles >10
lm in diameter)
is the most useful method to detect pulmonary vascular dilata-
tion. After the administration of agitated saline in a peripheral
vein, microbubble opaciﬁcation of the left atrium within three
to six cardiac cycles after right-atrial opaciﬁcation indicates
microbubble passage through an abnormally dilated vascular
bed, since microbubbles do not pass through normal capillar-
ies.
532 The injection of technetium-99 m–labeled macro-aggre-
gated albumin (MAA) in the peripheral vein for lung scanning
(MAA scan) is a potential alternative diagnostic procedure
although it is more invasive and less sensitive. Particles, with
a 20–50
lm size, escape through the abnormal pulmonary cap-
illaries and stay in downstream capillary beds supplied by sys-
temic arteries, such as the brain, kidneys, and spleen.
Quantitative imaging of the MAA scan in the brain and lung
enables calculation of the degree of shunting.
533,534 The mea-
surement of shunting with MAA scans may be useful as a com-
plementary diagnostic tool in patients with HPS in two clinical
situations. Firstly, in patients with a severe hypoxaemia and a
coexistent HPS and intrinsic lung disease since a shunting >6%
at MAA scan proves the major contribution of HPS to hypox-
aemia. Secondly, in patients with HPS and very severe hypox-
aemia (PaO
2 <50 mmHg), since the presence of shunting >20%
is associated with a poor outcome after LT. 535 Despite the
potential role of lung perfusion scintigraphy for prognostic use
in patients with cirrhosis and IPVD, its diagnostic accuracy for
HPS remains to be established.
536 Finally, neither constrast eco-
cardiography nor MAA scan can differentiate discrete arteriove-
nous communications from diffuse precapillary and capillary
dilatations or intracardiac shunt. The former distinction can be
made by means of pulmonary angiography. The latter distinc-
tion can be made by means of transoesophageal contrast-
enhanced echocardiography that directly reveals the intra-atrial
septum. Pulmonary angiography should not be performed in all
patients with suspected HPS, but only in: a) patients with the
severe hypoxaemia (PaO
2 <60 mmHg) poorly responsive to
administration of 100% oxygen, and b) patients strongly sus-
pected (by means of a CT chest scan) of having arteriovenous
communications that would be amenable to embolisation.
Recommendations
/C15 In presence of tachypnoea and polypnoea, digital club-
bing and/or cyanosis in a patient with the hallmarks of
chronic liver disease, HPS should be suspected and
investigated (II-2,1).
/C15 Pulse oximetry is the screening tool for HPS in adult
patients, but not in paediatric patients. For patients with
SpO
2 <96%, ABG analysis should be performed. A PaO 2
lower than 80 mmHg and or an alveolar-arterial oxygen
gradient (P[A-a]O
2) ≥15 mmHg while breathing ambient
air, should lead to further investigations. For adults ≥65
years a P[A-a]O2 ≥20 mmHg cut-off should be used(II-2,1).
/C15 The use of contrast (microbubble) echocardiography to
characterise HPS is recommended (II-2;1).
/C15 Trans-oesophageal contrast-enhanced echocardiography
can be performed to exclude deﬁnitively intra-cardiac
shunts, albeit this technique is not devoid of risks
(II-2;2).
/C15 An MAA scan should be performed as a complementary
tool to quantify the degree of shunting in patients with
severe hypoxaemia and coexistent intrinsic lung disease,
or to assess the prognosis in patients with HPS and very
severe hypoxaemia (PaO
2 <50 mmHg) (II-2;1).
/C15 Neither contrast echocardiography nor MAA scan can
deﬁnitively differentiate discrete arteriovenous commu-
nications from diffuse precapillary and capillary dilata-
tions or cardiac shunts. Pulmonary angiography should
be performed only in patients with the severe hypox-
aemia (PaO
2 <60 mmHg), poorly responsive to adminis-
tration of 100% oxygen, and in whom there is a strong
suspicion of arteriovenous communications that are
amenable to embolisation (II-2;1).
Natural history
The natural history of IPVD as well as of HPS is still unclear.
Most patients with IPVD maintain a normal gas exchange over
time, and it is not clear the reason why a subset of patients with
IPVD develops HPS.
537 A diagnosis of HPS is associated with a
poor outcome in terms of both survival and quality of
life.505,507,508 Regarding survival, it should be highlighted that
in patients undergoing evaluation for LT, the mortality rate
was almost double in patients with HPS compared to patients
with cirrhosis without HPS, independent of other potential pre-
dictors of mortality such as age, MELD score and comorbidi-
ties.
505 In patients with cirrhosis and HPS, who were not
Clinical Practice Guidelines
38 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

evaluated for LT, the ﬁve-year survival rate was 23% while it was
63% in patients with cirrhosis without HPS who were matched
for the aetiology and severity of cirrhosis according to the
Child-Pugh classiﬁcation, age, and MELD score.
503 Survival was
signiﬁcantly worse among patients with HPS and a PaO 2 of less
than 50 mmHg at the time of diagnosis. 506,507
Management
Medical treatment
Spontaneous resolution of HPS is uncommon. There is no estab-
lished medical therapy currently available for HPS. Several drugs
have been applied for the treatment of HPS with conﬂicting results.
However, no large randomised trial has been conducted, probably
because of the low number of patients. Data from several uncon-
trolled clinical studies and anecdotal evidence indicate that treat-
ment with beta-blockers, cyclooxygenase inhibitors, systemic
glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide, almitrine bismesylate,
inhaled nitric oxide, nitric oxide inhibitors, and antimicrobial
agents has been uniformly unsuccessful.
505 Pentoxifylline has also
been tried in the treatment of HPS in adults and children in two
small pilot studies with contradictory results in terms of improve-
ments in oxygenation and frequent GI side effects.538,539 Adminis-
tration of garlic was found to be associated with an improvement
in the PaO 2 in a small randomised study. 540 However, a case of
moderate hepatotoxicity associated with short-term, high-dose
garlicin therapy in an LT recipient with persistent HPS was
recently reported.
541 The use of TIPS has been proposed to reduce
portal pressure in patients with HPS. However, data are insufﬁ-
cient even when a systemic analysis review is considered. 542 In
addition, there is some concern that TIPS can enhance pulmonary
vasodilation by exacerbating the hyperkinetic circulation. Thus, no
recommendation for the use TIPS to treat HPS can be given.498,505
Finally, coil embolisation (embolotherapy) has been shown to
improve arterial oxygenation temporarily in the context of angio-
graphic arteriovenous communications. 531,543 Endothelin-1
receptor antagonists or angiogenesis inhibitors have not been
tested up to now in patients with HPS. Thus, long-term oxygen
therapy remains the most frequently recommended therapy for
symptoms in patients with severe hypoxaemia. However, some
aspects of this treatment such as efﬁcacy, costs, and compliance,
remain to be evaluated.
Recommendations
/C15 Long-term oxygen therapy is recommended in patients
with HPS and severe hypoxaemia. Nevertheless, there
is no available data concerning effectiveness, tolerance,
cost-effectiveness, compliance and effects on survival
rates of this therapy (II-2;1).
/C15 No recommendation can be proposed regarding the use
of drugs or the placement of TIPS for the treatment of
HPS (I;1).
Liver transplantation
The most common and the only successful treatment for HPS is
LT. LT results in a complete reversal or in a signiﬁcant improve-
ment of HPS in more than 85% of patients with severe hypox-
aemia.
544 In a prospective clinical study performed in the pre-
MELD era, a pre-LT severe hypoxaemia, in particular when it
was associated with a large shunting at MAA scan, was found
to be a very strong predictor of mortality after LT. 535 In 2007,
ﬁve years after the introduction of MELD in US, the United Net-
work for Organ Sharing (UNOS) recommended assigning an
MELD score of 22 for the initial application of patients with sev-
ere HPS (PaO
2 <60 mmHg), with further increases every three
months, to balance pre- and post-LT outcomes between HPS
and non-HPS candidates. 545 In the largest retrospective study
comparing the results of LT between the pre-MELD era and
the MELD era in patients with HPS, the ﬁve-year survival rate
after LT was found to improve from 67% during the pre-MELD
era to 88% in the MELD era.
546 Other data showed that in
post-MELD era, there was no association between pre-LT oxy-
genation and waitlist survival in patients with HPS. These ﬁnd-
ings reﬂect not only the results of the introduction of HPS as a
MELD exception, but also of an improved perioperative manage-
ment in patients with HPS. The regular assessment of the sever-
ity of hypoxaemia may facilitate LT prior to the occurrence of
very severe hypoxaemia. In fact, hypoxaemia can worsen in
patients with HPS who are on the active transplantation list,
with a median decrease in pO
2 of 5.2 mmHg per year, 508 and
it has been recently conﬁrmed that a pre-LT room-air PaO 2
≤44.0 mmHg is still associated with increased post-LT mortal-
ity.547 Thus, it has been suggested that an ABG analysis should
be carried out every six months, but no study has clariﬁed
which is the best method for conducting this (ABG analysis vs.
pulse oximetry) nor how frequently it should be performed.
Despite the increased survival rate in patients with HPS after
LT in the MELD era, it has recently been observed that HPS
MELD exception patients had lower overall mortality compared
to others awaiting LT, suggesting that the appropriateness of the
HPS MELD exception policy should be reassessed.
548 There are
very few and small studies on the impact of HPS on anaesthetic
procedures, as well as in the post-LT management in the ICU.
Nevertheless, it seems that inhaled nitric oxide, methylene blue,
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and non-invasive venti-
lation may improve oxygenation immediately post-LT.
549–551
Recommendations
/C15 Patients with HPS and PaO 2 <60 mmHg should be evalu-
ated for LT since it is the only treatment for HPS that has
been proven to be effective to date (II-2;1).
/C15 Since a severe hypoxaemia (PaO 2 <45–50 mmHg) is
associated with increased post-LT mortality, an ABG
analysis should be carried out every six months in order
to facilitate prioritisation to LT (II-2;1).
Portopulmonary hypertension
Deﬁnition and diagnosis
A diagnosis of PPHT should be considered in a patient with
established portal hypertension in the absence of other causes
of pulmonary artery or venous hypertension. namely: chronic
thromboembolism, chronic lung disease/hypoxia; chronic left
heart disease.
Patients may be asymptomatic but often present with exer-
tional dyspnoea and they may have clinical signs of right heart
failure when moderate to severe disease develops.
552 Classiﬁca-
tion of severity is based on mean pulmonary arterial pressure
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 39
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

(mPAP) and assumes there is high pulmonary vascular resis-
tance (PVR). PPHT is graded as mild (mPAP ≥25 and <35
mmHg); moderate (mPAP ≥35 and <45 mmHg), and severe
(mPAP ≥45 mmHg).
498 The diagnosis also requires there to be
normal pulmonary occlusion pressures, to exclude elevation of
pulmonary pressure resulting from elevated left ventricular ﬁll-
ing pressure. Transthoracic Doppler echocardiography (TDE) is
the main screening tool for evaluating the presence of PPHT
when screening high-risk patients, such as those being consid-
ered for TIPS or LT.
553–555 As a screening test, some studies sug-
gest a pulmonary artery systolic pressure of >30 mmHg on TDE
has a negative predictive value of 100%, but a positive predictive
value of only 59%.
554 However, when assessing patients for LT,
the threshold for right heart catheterisation is less clear, with
a right ventricular systolic pressure >50 mmHg and/or signiﬁ-
cant right ventricular hypertrophy seen as the trigger for this
investigation to rule out signiﬁcant PPHT.
555
Pathophysiology
In patients with portal hypertension, PPHT is thought to arise
from limited blood ﬂow in the pulmonary arterial circulation
because of vasoconstriction. Numerous factors are thought to
be responsible for this including: Changes in endogenous vaso-
regulators; increased endothelin 1 and reduced prostacyclin syn-
thase from pulmonary endothelial cells; proliferation of smooth
muscle cells/endothelial activation and platelet aggregation.
Natural history and prognosis
From studies in patients evaluated for LT, the incidence is
thought to be between 3–10% based on haemodynamic criteria.
Furthermore, female sex and pre-existing autoimmune liver dis-
ease are thought to be independent risk factors.
556 Genetic vari-
ation in oestradiol levels may increase the predisposition to
pulmonary artery vasoconstriction. Indeed, women are at three
times greater risk than men.
557 There is also an association
between patients who have moderate to severe PPHT and the
presence of large portosystemic shunts.
558 However, there is
no clear association between the severity of liver disease or por-
tal hypertension and the development of severe PPHT. 556,559
Studies quote survival rates at one year of between 35–46%
without speciﬁc treatment. 560,561 Mortality is often associated
with other complications of liver disease such as hepatocellular
cancer, sepsis and GI bleeding and right ventricular failure.
Increased rates of mortality are related to higher right atrial
pressure and lower cardiac index.
559,562 In a multicentre reg-
istry study, patients with PPHT were shown to have worse out-
comes than patients with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension,
with a ﬁve-year survival of 40% vs. 64%.
563 However, a retro-
spective French study challenges this, whilst reporting
increased mortality in those with a lower cardiac index, likely
reﬂecting failed compensation to increased right ventricular
dysfunction, and patients with more advanced liver disease.
564
Medical treatment
The evidence base for pharmacological therapies in PPHT is lim-
ited with most data extrapolated from studies in pulmonary
arterial hypertension not related to liver disease. 565,566 Drugs
to promote acute vasodilatation during right heart catheterisa-
tion assessment, theoretically may be deleterious as they run
the risk of further reducing cardiac index. There is a lack of data
to clarify this.
567 Conversely, whilst patients with advanced
portal hypertension may be on treatment with beta-blockers,
withdrawing beta-blocker therapy may help to increase cardiac
output and thereby help exertional dyspnoea, in patients with
advanced PPHT.
568
Endothelin receptor antagonists . Bosentan has been shown to
improve pulmonary artery haemodynamics and exercise toler-
ance in patients with PPHT, independently of liver disease
severity.
569–572 One retrospective study reports survival rates
of up to 89% at three years. 573 Others have shown improve-
ments in cardiac index up to 39%, albeit in a small number of
patients, but an increase in aminotransferases, which responded
to dose reduction or discontinuation.
571 The FDA places a cau-
tion on this class of drug in patients with advanced liver dys-
function. There is limited data on the use of other members in
this family of agent, including ambrisentan and macitentan,
for PPHT.
574,575
Phosphodiesterase subtype-5 inhibitors . Blockade of phosphodi-
esterase-5 inhibitors facilitate the vasodilatory effects of nitric
oxide, through reduced metabolism of cGMP. Small case series
suggest that sildenaﬁl improves functional capacity and
increases cardiac output.
576–578 It should be noted that silde-
naﬁl can precipitate variceal bleeding and as such, caution
should be exercised. 579
Prostacyclin analogues. Prostacyclin analogues have many poten-
tial beneﬁts including vasodilatory, reduced vascular smooth
muscle proliferation and anti-thrombotic. Case series suggest
improved pulmonary haemodynamics with i.v. epoprostenol
and the potential for improved ﬁve-year survival compared to
registry data in pulmonary artery hypertension (70 vs.
40%).
580–583 However, lower doses than those used in idiopathic
pulmonary hypertension are suggested to reduce the develop-
ment of thrombocytopenia and splenomegaly. Other studies
have also looked at use of inhaled iloprost and reported short-
term haemodynamic beneﬁt.
584
Impact of the management of other complications of cirrhosis
Caution should be exercised when considering TIPS placement
for the treatment of other complications of cirrhosis in patients
with proven PPHT. The anticipated increase in right ventricular
ﬁlling pressures and cardiac output may precipitate marked
increases in PVR and right-sided pressure overload.
585,586
Moderate PPHT (mPAP >35 and <45 mmHg) is a relative con-
traindication for TIPS placement, and severe PPHT is an absolute
contraindication.586
Recommendations
/C15 Screening for PPHT should be via TDE in patients deemed
potential recipients for TIPS or LT; in those with a posi-
tive screening test, right heart catheterisation should
be performed (II-1;1).
/C15 In patients with PPHT who are listed for transplantation,
echocardiography should be repeated on the waitlist,
albeit, the speciﬁc interval is unclear (III;1).
/C15 Beta-blockers should be stopped and varices managed
by endoscopic therapy in cases of proven PPHT (II-3;1).
Clinical Practice Guidelines
40 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

/C15 Therapies that have been approved for primary pul-
monary arterial hypertension may have beneﬁt in PPHT
to improve exercise tolerance and haemodynamics. How-
ever, endothelin antagonists should be used with caution
because of concerns over hepatic impairment (II-2;1).
/C15 TIPS should not be used in patients with PPHT (II-3;1).
Liver transplantation
Historically, severe PPHT has been a relative contraindication
for LT because of very poor outcomes. However, with the advent
of improved haemodynamic control with agents such as i.v.
prostacyclin, there are case series showing normal pulmonary
haemodynamics almost two years post LT.
587,588
Stratifying risk for LT . In patients with an mPAP ≥45–50 mmHg,
most centres would deem this an absolute contraindication to
transplantation irrespective of therapy applied. 562,587,589
Patients with an mPAP >35 have increased risk post LT, associ-
ated with increased hospital stay and longer ventilator require-
ments.562,590,591 If LT is considered in such patients, it is
suggested that their PPHT is treated aggressively to lower mPAP
and improve right ventricular function.
588,592,593
To facilitate access to LT before there is further progression
of PPHT to a point where transplantation risks are deemed too
high, MELD exception (MELD 22 points) has been granted to
patients with PPHT (mPAP >25 mmHg and PVR >240 dynes/s
per cm
/C0 5) with at least moderate disease severity (baseline
mPAP >35 mmHg). 594 Patients are considered surgical candi-
dates if, after targeted therapy to lower PAP, they have
improved mPAP (<35 mmHg) and PVR (<400 dyne/s per cm /C0 5)
and/or normalise their PVR. Applying this exception has been
noted to reduce waitlist mortality.
595
Per-operative considerations . All patients should be monitored
with a pulmonary artery catheter. Therapy to lower mPAP
should be continued throughout the operative period, given that
there is often a rise in cardiac output post re-perfusion and this
may add more stress on any pre-existing impaired right ventri-
cle function.
595–597 Indeed, in some cases, a severe acute rise in
PAP may lead to graft failure because of hepatic congestion
through a failing right ventricle. The management of such
adverse haemodynamics, in addition to i.v. prostacyclin or
inhaled nitric oxide includes the use of extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygen therapy (ECMO).
598,599
Postoperative considerations . Monitoring PAP response to ther-
apy is via serial transthoracic echo with tissue Doppler at 4–
6-month intervals and consideration of tapering pulmonary
artery targeted therapy, though no controlled data exists to
provide guidance on this.
581,600,601 Case reports and series
suggest that 29–64% of patients with moderate to severe
PPHT under long-term follow-up post-transplant have been
able to discontinue therapy over time. 599–602 Indeed, some
suggest a return to normal right ventricle function following
therapy for PPHT in the pre-transplant period and then after
transplant surgery. 581,601 PPHT MELD exception patients have
worse one-year mortality or graft failure than patients with-
out PPHT. 603
Recommendations
/C15 If mPAP <35 mmHg and right ventricular function is pre-
served, LT should be considered (II-2,1). A mPAP of ≥45
mmHg should be considered an absolute contraindica-
tion to LT irrespective of therapy applied (III,1).
/C15 Therapy to lower mPAP and improve right ventricular
function should be commenced in patients with mPAP
≥35 mmHg. Right ventricular function should be period-
ically evaluated (II-2,1).
/C15 MELD exception can be considered in patients with proven
PPHT in whom targeted therapy fails to decrease mPAP
<35 mmHg but does facilitate normalisation of PVR to
<240 dynes/s cm
/C0 5 and right ventricular function (II-3;2).
/C15 MELD exception should be advocated in patients with
proven PPHT of moderate severity (assessment mPAP
≥35 mmHg) in whom targeted treatment lowers mPAP
<35 mmHg and PVR <400 dynes/s cm
/C0 5 (II-2;1).
Conclusions
These guidelines on the management of patients with decom-
pensated cirrhosis were developed based on a new pathophys-
iological background that offers the opportunity for more
comprehensive therapeutic or prophylactic approaches to man-
age the disease. The knowledge of the key pathophysiologic
mechanisms makes it possible nowadays to counteract the pro-
gression of cirrhosis and so to prevent its complications. This
represents a step forward, shifting our approach from treating
the complications of decompensated cirrhosis to preventing
their occurrence. However, to make this possible it is crucial
to think about new models of specialist care for patients with
cirrhosis. A care coordination programme, has been proven to
improve survival and to reduce emergent readmission to the
hospital in these patients.
604 Care coordinators can facilitate
the development of educational programmes for patients and
caregivers optimising their adherence to guideline recommen-
dations. In addition, they can plan invasive procedures in a
day hospital, allowing transfer of real-time information to pri-
mary care physicians to improve quality and coordination of
care. In so doing, it is possible to prevent unnecessary visits to
the emergency department and/or emergent readmission to
the hospital. These measures will progressively reduce the bur-
den of cirrhosis.
Conﬂict of interest
Paolo Angeli: Consultancy fee from Sequana Medical AG, Gilead
Italy and Biovie; Patent inventor from Biovie; Research grant
from Gilead; Speaker’s fee from Bhering, Kedrion 2016. Mauro
Bernardi: Consultancy fee from CLS Behring GmbH, Baxter
Healthcare SA, Grifols SA; Speaker’s fee from CLS Behring GmbH,
Baxter Healthcare SA, PPTA Europe, Octapharma AG, Gilead
Sciences, AbbVie Italia. Wim Laleman: Speaker’s fee for Gore,
Norgine, 4C, Abbvie, Sirtex; Consultancy fee for AbbVie, Gilead,
MSD, Intercept; Research grant from Gilead. Jonel Trebicka:
Speaker’s fee or Consultancy fee from Gore & associates (TIPS),
Sequana medical (alpha-pump), Alexion (PNH), Versantis (lipo-
somes). Aleksander Krag: None. Claire Francoz: None. Pere
Gines: Advisory/Consultancy fee for Sequana Grifols, Mallinck-
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 41
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

rodt, Ferring Pharmaceuticals; Research Funding from Sequana,
Grifols, Ferring Pharmaceuticals.
Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for
further details.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Alessandra Brocca Dr, Marta Tonon MD,
Husain-Syed Faeq MD for the great editorial work. We acknowledge
ICREA for the ACADEMIA AWARD given to Pere Ginès. We would like
to thank the reviewers of this Clinical Practice Guideline for their
time and critical reviewing: EASL Governing Board, Alexander
Gerbes, Thierry Gustot, Guadalupe Garcia-Tsao.
References
[1] EASL clinical practice guidelines on the management of ascites,
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, and hepatorenal syndrome in cirrho-
sis. J Hepatol 2010;53:397–417 .
[2] D’Amico G. The clinical course of cirrhosis. Population based studies and
the need of personalized medicine. J Hepatol 2014;60:241–242
.
[3] Moreau R, Jalan R, Gines P, Pavesi M, Angeli P, Cordoba J, et al. Acute-on-
chronic liver failure is a distinct syndrome that develops in patients
with AD of cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2013;144:1426–1437
.
[4] D’Amico G, Garcia-Tsao G, Pagliaro L. Natural history and prognostic
indicators of survival in cirrhosis: a systematic review of 118 studies. J
Hepatol 2006;44:217–231
.
[5] Bernardi M, Moreau R, Angeli P, Schnabl B, Arroyo V. Mechanisms of
decompensation and organ failure in cirrhosis: From peripheral arterial
vasodilation to systemic inﬂammation hypothesis. J Hepatol
2015;63:1272–1284
.
[6] Jalan R, Fernandez J, Wiest R, Schnabl B, Moreau R, Angeli P, et al.
Bacterial infections in cirrhosis: a position statement based on the EASL
Special Conference. J Hepatol 2013;60:1310–1324
.
[7] Arvaniti V, D’Amico G, Fede G, Manousou P, Tsochatzis E, Pleguezuelo
M, et al. Infections in patients with cirrhosis increase mortality four-
fold and should be used in determining prognosis. Gastroenterology
2010;139:1246–1256
.
[8] Schrier RW, Arroyo V, Bernardi M, Epstein M, Henriksen JH, Rodes J.
Peripheral arterial vasodilation hypothesis: a proposal for the initiation
of renal sodium and water retention in cirrhosis. Hepatology
1988;8:1151–1157
.
[9] Wiese S, Hove JD, Bendtsen F, Moller S. Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy:
pathogenesis and clinical relevance. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
2014;11:177–186.
[10] Arroyo V, Terra C, Gines P. Advances in the pathogenesis and treatment
of type-1 and type-2 hepatorenal syndrome. J Hepatol 2007;46:
935–946
.
[11] Iwakiri Y, Groszmann RJ. The hyperdynamic circulation of chronic liver
diseases: from the patient to the molecule. Hepatology 2006;43:
S121–S131.
[12] Claria J, Stauber RE, Coenraad MJ, Moreau R, Jalan R, Pavesi M, et al.
Systemic inﬂammation in decompensated cirrhosis: Characterization
and role in acute-on-chronic liver failure. Hepatology 2016;64:
1249–1264
.
[13] Trautwein C, Friedman SL, Schuppan D, Pinzani M. Hepatic ﬁbrosis:
Concept to treatment. J Hepatol 2015;62:S15–S24 .
[14] Alvarez MA, Cirera I, Sola R, Bargallo A, Morillas RM, Planas R.
Long-term clinical course of decompensated alcoholic cirrhosis: a
prospective study of 165 patients. J Clin Gastroenterol 2011;45:
906–911
.
[15] Powell Jr WJ, Klatskin G. Duration of survival in patients with Laennec’s
cirrhosis. Inﬂuence of alcohol withdrawal, and possible effects of recent
changes in general management of the disease. Am J Med
1968;44:406–420
.
[16] Shim JH, Lee HC, Kim KM, Lim YS, Chung YH, Lee YS, et al. Efﬁcacy of
entecavir in treatment-naive patients with hepatitis B virus-related
decompensated cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2010;52:176–182
.
[17] Cheung MC, Walker AJ, Hudson BE, Verma S, McLauchlan J, Mutimer DJ,
et al. Outcomes after successful direct-acting antiviral therapy for
patients with chronic hepatitis C and decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol 2016;65:741–747
.
[18] Lens S, Alvarado E, Mariño Z, et al. Effects of all-oral antiviral
therapy on HVPG and systemic hemodynamics in patients with
hepatitis C virus-associated cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2017;153:
1273–1283
.
[19] Kang SH, Lee YB, Lee JH, Nam JY, Chang Y, Cho H, et al. Rifaximin
treatment is associated with reduced risk of cirrhotic complications and
prolonged overall survival in patients experiencing hepatic
encephalopathy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2017;46:845–855
.
[20] Ginès P, Schrier RW. Renal failure in cirrhosis. N Engl J Med
2009;361:1279–1290.
[21] Moreau R, Elkrief L, Bureau C, Pararnau JM, Thavenot T, Saliba F, et al. A
randomized trial of 6-month norﬂoxacin therapy in patients with
Child-Pugh class C cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2017;66:S1
.
[22] Caraceni P, Riggio O, Angeli P, Alessandria C, Neri S, Foschi FG, et al.
Long-term albumin administration in decompensated cirrhosis: an
open label randomized trial. Lancet 2018, [In press] .
[23] Sola E, Sola C, Simon-Talero M, Martin-Llahi M, Castellote J, Garcia-
Martinez R, et al. Midodrine and albumin for prevention of complica-
tions of cirrhosis in patients in the waiting list for liver transplantation.
A randomized, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J
Hepatol 2017;66:S11
.
[24] Abraldes JG, Albillos A, Banares R, Turnes J, Gonzalez R, Garcia-Pagan JC,
et al. Simvastatin lowers portal pressure in patients with cirrhosis and
portal hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. Gastroenterology
2009;136:1651–1658
.
[25] Abraldes JG, Villanueva C, Aracil C, Turnes J, Hernandez-Guerra M,
Genesca J, et al. Addition of simvastatin to standard therapy for the
prevention of variceal rebleeding does not reduce rebleeding but
increases survival in patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology
2016;150:1160–1170
.
[26] Villa E, Cammà C, Marietta M, Luongo M, Critelli R, Colopi S, et al.
Enoxaparin prevents portal vein thrombosis and liver decompensation
in patients with advanced cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2012;143:
1253–12609
.
[27] Lebrec D, Thabut D, Oberti F, Perarnau JM, Condat B, Barraud H, et al.
Pentoxifylline does not decrease short-term mortality but does reduce
complications in patients with advanced cirrhosis. Gastroenterology
2010;138:1755–1762
.
[28] Abraldes JG, Tarantino I, Turnes J, Garcia-Pagan JC, Rodes J, Bosch J.
Hemodynamic response to pharmacological treatment of portal hyper-
tension and long-term prognosis of cirrhosis. Hepatology 2003;37:
902–908
.
[29] Gines P, Quintero E, Arroyo V, Teres J, Bruguera M, Rimola A, et al.
Compensated cirrhosis: natural history and prognostic factors. Hepa-
tology 1987;7:122–128
.
[30] Ripoll C, Groszmann R, Garcia-Tsao G, Grace N, Burroughs A, Planas R,
et al. Hepatic venous pressure gradient predicts clinical decompensa-
tion in patients with compensated cirrhosis. Gastroenterology
2007;133:481–488
.
[31] Moore KP, Wong F, Gines P, Bernardi M, Ochs A, Salerno F, et al. The
management of ascites in cirrhosis: report on the consensus conference
of the International Ascites Club. Hepatology 2003;38:258–266
.
[32] Arroyo V, Gines P, Gerbes AL, Dudley FJ, Gentilini P, Lafﬁ G, et al.
Deﬁnition and diagnostic criteria of refractory ascites and hepatorenal
syndrome in cirrhosis. International Ascites Club. Hepatology
1996;23:164–176
.
[33] Rimola A, Garcia-Tsao G, Navasa M, Piddock LJ, Planas R, Bernard B,
et al. Diagnosis, treatment and prophylaxis of spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis: a consensus document. International Ascites Club. J Hepatol
2000;32:142–153
.
[34] Bruns T, Lutz P, Stallmach A. Nischalke HD Low ascitic ﬂuid protein does
not indicate an increased risk for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis in
current cohorts. J Hepatol 2015;63:527–528
.
[35] Runyon BA, Canawati HN, Akriviadis EA. Optimization of ascitic ﬂuid
culture technique. Gastroenterology 1988;95:1351–1355
.
[36] Runyon BA, Montano AA, Akriviadis EA, Antillon MR, Irving MA,
McHutchison JG. The serum-ascites albumin gradient is superior to
the exudate-transudate concept in the differential diagnosis of ascites.
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:215–220
.
[37] Gerbes AL, Jüngst D, Xie YN, Permanetter W, Paumgartner G. Ascitic
ﬂuid analysis for the differentiation of malignancy-related and nonma-
lignant ascites. Proposal of a diagnostic sequence. Cancer 1991;68:
1808–1814
.
[38] Llach J, Gines P, Arroyo V, Rimola A, Tito L, Badalamenti S, et al.
Prognostic value of arterial pressure, endogenous vasoactive systems,
and renal function in cirrhotic patients admitted to the hospital for the
treatment of ascites. Gastroenterology 1988;94:482–487
.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
42 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[39] Caregaro L, Menon F, Angeli P, Amodio P, Merkel C, Bortoluzzi A, et al.
Limitations of serum creatinine level and creatinine clearance as
ﬁltration markers in cirrhosis. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:201–205
.
[40] Bernardi M, Gitto S, Biselli M. The MELD score in patients awaiting liver
transplant: strengths and weaknesses. J Hepatol 2011;54:1297–1306
.
[41] Biselli M, Dall’Agata M, Gramenzi A, Gitto S, Liberati C, Brodosi L, et al. A
new prognostic model to predict dropout from the waiting list in
cirrhotic candidates for liver transplantation with MELD score <18.
Liver Int 2015;35:184–191
.
[42] Bernardi M, Santini C, Trevisani F, Baraldini M, Ligabue A, Gasbarrini G.
Renal function impairment induced by change in posture in patients
with cirrhosis and ascites. Gut 1985;26:629–635
.
[43] Ring-Larsen H, Henriksen JH, Wilken C, Clausen J, Pals H, Christensen NJ.
Diuretic treatment in decompensated cirrhosis and congestive heart
failure: effect of posture. Br Med J 1986;292:1351–1353
.
[44] Bernardi M, Lafﬁ G, Salvagnini M, Azzena G, Bonato S, Marra F, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of the stepped care medical treatment of ascites in
liver cirrhosis: a randomized controlled clinical trial comparing two
diets with different sodium content. Liver 1993;13:156–162
.
[45] Gauthier A, Levy VG, Quinton A, Michel H, Rueff B, Descos L, et al. Salt or
no salt in the treatment of cirrhotic ascites: a randomised study. Gut
1986;27:705–709
.
[46] Reynolds TB, Lieberman FL, Goodman AR. Advantages of treatment of
ascites without sodium restriction and without complete removal of
excess ﬂuid. Gut 1978;19:549–553
.
[47] Morando F, Rosi S, Gola E, Nardi M, Piano S, Fasolato S, et al. Adherence
to a moderate sodium restriction diet in outpatients with cirrhosis and
ascites: a real-life cross-sectional study. Liver Int 2015;35:1508–1515
.
[48] Pockros PJ, Reynolds TB. Rapid diuresis in patients with ascites from
chronic liver disease: the importance of peripheral edema. Gastroen-
terology 1986;90:1827–1833
.
[49] Bernardi M, Trevisani F, Gasbarrini A, Gasbarrini G. Hepatorenal
disorders: role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Semin
Liver Dis 1994;14:23–34 .
[50] Bernardi M, Servadei D, Trevisani F, Rusticali AG, Gasbarrini G.
Importance of plasma aldosterone concentration on the natriuretic
effect of spironolactone in patients with liver cirrhosis and ascites.
Digestion 1985;31:189–193
.
[51] Angeli P, Dalla Pria M, De Bei E, Albino G, Caregaro L, Merkel C, et al.
Randomized clinical study of the efﬁcacy of amiloride and potassium
canrenoate in nonazotemic cirrhotic patients with ascites. Hepatology
1994;19:72–79
.
[52] Angeli P, Gatta A, Caregaro L, Menon F, Sacerdoti D, Merkel C, et al.
Tubular site of renal sodium retention in ascitic liver cirrhosis evalu-
ated by lithium clearance. Eur J Clin Invest 1990;20:111–117
.
[53] Gatta A, Angeli P, Caregaro L, Menon F, Sacerdoti D, Merkel C. A
pathophysiological interpretation of unresponsiveness to spironolac-
tone in a stepped-care approach to the diuretic treatment of ascites in
nonazotemic cirrhotic patients. Hepatology 1991;14:231–236
.
[54] Perez-Ayuso RM, Arroyo V, Planas R, Gaya J, Bory F, Rimola A, et al.
Randomized comparative study of efﬁcacy of furosemide vs. spirono-
lactone in nonazotemic cirrhosis with ascites. Relationship between the
diuretic response and the activity of the renin-aldosterone system.
Gastroenterology 1983;84:961–968
.
[55] Angeli P, Fasolato S, Mazza E, Okolicsanyi L, Maresio G, Velo E, et al.
Combined vs. sequential diuretic treatment of ascites in non-azotaemic
patients with cirrhosis: results of an open randomised clinical trial. Gut
2010;59:98–104
.
[56] Santos J, Planas R, Pardo A, Durandez R, Cabre E, Morillas RM, et al.
Spironolactone alone or in combination with furosemide in the
treatment of moderate ascites in nonazotemic cirrhosis. A randomized
comparative study of efﬁcacy and safety. J Hepatol 2003;39:187–192
.
[57] Gerbes AL, Bertheau-Reitha U, Falkner C, Jüngst D, Paumgartner G.
Advantages of the new loop diuretic torasemide over furosemide in
patients with cirrhosis and ascites. A randomized, double blind cross-
over trial. J Hepatol 1993;17:353–358
.
[58] Angeli P, Albino G, Carraro P, Dalla Pria M, Merkel C, Caregaro L, et al.
Cirrhosis and muscle cramps: evidence of a causal relationship.
Hepatology 1996;23:264–273
.
[59] Elfert AA, Abo Ali L, Soliman S, Zakaria S, Shehab El-Din I, Elkhalawany
W, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled study of baclofen in the
treatment of muscle cramps in patients with liver cirrhosis. Eur J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;28:1280–1284
.
[60] Lee FY, Lee SD, Tsai YT, et al. A randomized controlled trial of quinidine
in the treatment of cirrhotic patients with muscle cramps. J Hepatol
1991;12:236–240
.
[61] Lin CH, Shih FY, Ma MH, Chiang WC, Yang CW, Ko PC. Should bleeding
tendency deter abdominal paracentesis? Dig Liver Dis 2005;37:
946–951
.
[62] Pache I, Bilodeau M. Severe haemorrhage following abdominal para-
centesis for ascites in patients with liver disease. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther 2005;21:525–529
.
[63] Gines P, Tito L, Arroyo V, Planas R, Panes J, Viver J, et al. Randomized
comparative study of therapeutic paracentesis with and without
intravenous albumin in cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 1988;94:
1493–1502
.
[64] Gines A, Fernandez-Esparrach G, Monescillo A, Vila C, Domenech E,
Abecasis R, et al. Randomized trial comparing albumin, dextran 70, and
polygeline in cirrhotic patients with ascites treated by paracentesis.
Gastroenterology 1996;111:1002–1010
.
[65] Sola-Vera J, Minana J, Ricart E, Planella M, Gonzalez B, Torras X, et al.
Randomized trial comparing albumin and saline in the prevention of
paracentesis-induced circulatory dysfunction in cirrhotic patients with
ascites. Hepatology 2003;37:1147–1153
.
[66] Bernardi M, Caraceni P, Navickis RJ, Wilkes MM. Albumin infusion in
patients undergoing large-volume paracentesis: a meta-analysis of
randomized trials. Hepatology 2012;55:1172–1181 .
[67] Moreau R, Valla DC, Durand-Zaleski I, Bronowicki JP, Durand F, Chaput
JC, et al. Comparison of outcome in patients with cirrhosis and ascites
following treatment with albumin or a synthetic colloid: a randomised
controlled pilot trail. Liver Int 2006;26:46–54
.
[68] Gines P, Arroyo V, Quintero E, Planas R, Bory F, Cabrera J, et al.
Comparison of paracentesis and diuretics in the treatment of cirrhotics
with tense ascites. Results of a randomized study. Gastroenterology
1987;93:234–241
.
[69] Salerno F, Badalamenti S, Incerti P, Tempini S, Restelli B, Bruno S, et al.
Repeated paracentesis and i.v. albumin infusion to treat ’tense’ ascites
in cirrhotic patients. A safe alternative therapy. J Hepatol
1987;5:102–108
.
[70] Fernandez-Esparrach G, Guevara M, Sort P, Pardo A, Jimenez W, Gines P,
et al. Diuretic requirements after therapeutic paracentesis in non-
azotemic patients with cirrhosis. A randomized double-blind trial of
spironolactone vs. placebo. J Hepatol 1997;26:614–620 .
[71] Elia C, Graupera I, Barreto R, Solà E, Moreira R, Huelin P, et al. Severe
acute kidney injury associated with non-steroidal antiinﬂammatory
drugs in cirrhosis: a case-control study. J Hepatol 2015;63:593–600
.
[72] Claria J, Kent JD, Lopez-Parra M, Escolar G, Ruiz-Del-Arbol L, Gines P,
et al. Effects of celecoxib and naproxen on renal function in nona-
zotemic patients with cirrhosis and ascites. Hepatology
2005;41:579–587
.
[73] Llach J, Gines P, Arroyo V, Salmeron JM, Gines A, Jimenez W, et al. Effect
of dipyridamole on kidney function in cirrhosis. Hepatology
1993;17:59–64.
[74] Pariente EA, Bataille C, Bercoff E, Lebrec D. Acute effects of captopril on
systemic and renal hemodynamics and on renal function in cirrhotic
patients with ascites. Gastroenterology 1985;88:1255–1259
.
[75] Albillos A, Lledo JL, Rossi I, Perez-Paramo M, Tabuenca MJ, Banares R,
et al. Continuous prazosin administration in cirrhotic patients: effects
on portal hemodynamics and on liver and renal function. Gastroen-
terology 1995;109:1257–1265
.
[76] Cabrera J, Arroyo V, Ballesta AM, Rimola A, Gual J, Elena M, et al.
Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity in cirrhosis. Value of urinary beta 2-
microglobulin to discriminate functional renal failure from acute
tubular damage. Gastroenterology 1982;82:97–105
.
[77] Guevara M, Fernández-Esparrach G, Alessandria C, Torre A, Terra C,
Montañà X, et al. Effects of contrast media on renal function in patients
with cirrhosis: a prospective study. Hepatology 2004;40:646–651
.
[78] Solomon R, Werner C, Mann D, D’Elia J, Silva P. Comparison of saline,
mannitol, and furosemide to prevent acute decreases in renal
function induced by radiocontrast agents. N Engl J Med 1994;331:
1416–1420
.
[79] Salerno F, Borroni G, Moser P, Badalamenti S, Cassara L, Maggi A, et al.
Survival and prognostic factors of cirrhotic patients with ascites: a
study of 134 outpatients. Am J Gastroenterol 1993;88:514–519
.
[80] Guardiola J, Baliellas C, Xiol X, Fernandez Esparrach G, Gines P, Ventura
P, et al. External validation of a prognostic model for predicting survival
of cirrhotic patients with refractory ascites. Am J Gastroenterol
2002;97:2374–2378
.
[81] Huonker M, Schumacher YO, Ochs A, Sorichter S, Keul J, Rossle M.
Cardiac function and haemodynamics in alcoholic cirrhosis and effects
of the transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt. Gut
1999;44:743–748
.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 43
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[82] Sanyal AJ, Freedman AM, Luketic VA, Purdum 3rd PP, Shiffman ML,
DeMeo J, et al. The natural history of portal hypertension after
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts. Gastroenterology
1997;112:889–898
.
[83] Wong F, Sniderman K, Liu P, Allidina Y, Sherman M, Blendis L.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt: effects on hemo-
dynamics and sodium homeostasis in cirrhosis and refractory ascites.
Ann Intern Med 1995;122:816–822
.
[84] Wong F, Sniderman K, Liu P, Blendis L. The mechanism of the initial
natriuresis after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. Gas-
troenterology 1997;112:899–907
.
[85] Gerbes AL, Gülberg V, Waggershauser T, Holl J, Reiser M. Renal effects of
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt in cirrhosis: comparison
of patients with ascites, with refractory ascites, or without ascites.
Hepatology 1998;28:683–688
.
[86] Ochs A, Rossle M, Haag K, Hauenstein KH, Deibert P, Siegerstetter V,
et al. The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent-shunt proce-
dure for refractory ascites. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1192–1197
.
[87] Plauth M, Schutz T, Buckendahl DP, Kreymann G, Pirlich M, Grungreiff S,
et al. Weight gain after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt is
associated with improvement in body composition in malnourished
patients with cirrhosis and hypermetabolism. J Hepatol 2004;40:
228–233
.
[88] Gülberg V, Liss I, Bilzer M, Waggershauser T, Reiser M, Gerbes AL.
Improved quality of life in patients with refractory or recidivant ascites
after insertion of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts.
Digestion 2002;66:127–130
.
[89] Casado M, Bosch J, Garcia-Pagan JC, Bru C, Banares R, Bandi JC, et al.
Clinical events after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt:
correlation with hemodynamic ﬁndings. Gastroenterology
1998;114:1296–1303
.
[90] Riggio O, Angeloni S, Salvatori FM, De Santis A, Cerini F, Farcomeni A,
et al. Incidence, natural history, and risk factors of hepatic encephalopa-
thy after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt with polyte-
traﬂuoroethylene-covered stent grafts. Am J Gastroenterol
2008;103:2738–2746
.
[91] Sauerbruch T, Mengel M, Dollinger M, Zipprich A, Rossle M, Panther E,
et al. Prevention of rebleeding from esophageal varices in patients with
cirrhosis receiving small-diameter stents vs. hemodynamically con-
trolled medical therapy. Gastroenterology 2015;149:660–668
.
[92] Wang Q, Lv Y, Bai M, Wang Z, Liu H, He C, et al. Eight millimetre covered
TIPS does not compromise shunt function but reduces hepatic
encephalopathy in preventing variceal rebleeding. J Hepatol 2017;67:
508–516
.
[93] Pieper CC, Jansen C, Meyer C, Nadal J, Lehmann J, Schild HH, et al.
Prospective evaluation of passive expansion of partially dilated tran-
sjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt stent grafts-a three-dimen-
sional sonography study. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2017;28:117–125
.
[94] Bureau C, Garcia-Pagan JC, Otal P, Pomier-Layrargues G, Chabbert V,
Cortez C, et al. Improved clinical outcome using polytetraﬂuo-
roethylene-coated stents for TIPS: results of a randomized study.
Gastroenterology 2004;126:469–475
.
[95] Gines P, Uriz J, Calahorra B, Garcia-Tsao G, Kamath PS, Del Arbol LR,
et al. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting vs. paracentesis
plus albumin for refractory ascites in cirrhosis. Gastroenterology
2002;123:1839–1847
.
[96] Lebrec D, Giuily N, Hadengue A, Vilgrain V, Moreau R, Poynard T, et al.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts: comparison with
paracentesis in patients with cirrhosis and refractory ascites: a
randomized trial. French Group of Clinicians and a Group of Biologists.
J Hepatol 1996;25:135–144
.
[97] Narahara Y, Kanazawa H, Fukuda T, Matsushita Y, Harimoto H, Kidokoro
H, et al. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt vs. paracentesis
plus albumin in patients with refractory ascites who have good hepatic
and renal function: a prospective randomized trial. J Gastroenterol
2011;46:78–85
.
[98] Rossle M, Ochs A, Gulberg V, Siegerstetter V, Holl J, Deibert P, et al. A
comparison of paracentesis and transjugular intrahepatic portosys-
temic shunting in patients with ascites. N Engl J Med 2000;342:
1701–1707
.
[99] Salerno F, Merli M, Riggio O, Cazzaniga M, Valeriano V, Pozzi M, et al.
Randomized controlled study of TIPS vs. paracentesis plus albumin in
cirrhosis with severe ascites. Hepatology 2004;40:629–635 .
[100] Sanyal AJ, Genning C, Reddy KR, Wong F, Kowdley KV, Benner K, et al.
The North American study for the treatment of refractory ascites.
Gastroenterology 2003;124:634–641
.
[101] Albillos A, Banares R, Gonzalez M, Catalina MV, Molinero LM. A meta-
analysis of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt vs. paracen-
tesis for refractory ascites. J Hepatol 2005;43:990–996 .
[102] Bai M, Qi XS, Yang ZP, Yang M, Fan DM, Han GH. TIPS improves liver
transplantation-free survival in cirrhotic patients with refractory
ascites: an updated meta-analysis. World J Gastroenterol
2014;20:2704–2714
.
[103] Chen RP, Zhu Ge XJ, Huang ZM, Ye XH, Hu CY, Lu GR, et al. Prophylactic
use of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt aids in the
treatment of refractory ascites: metaregression and trial sequential
meta-analysis. J Clin Gastroenterol 2014;48:290–299
.
[104] D’Amico G, Luca A, Morabito A, Miraglia R, D’Amico M. Uncovered
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt for refractory ascites: a
meta-analysis. Gastroenterology 2005;129:1282–1293 .
[105] Deltenre P, Mathurin P, Dharancy S, Moreau R, Bulois P, Henrion J, et al.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt in refractory ascites: a
meta-analysis. Liver Int 2005;25:349–356
.
[106] Saab S, Nieto JM, Lewis SK, Runyon BA. TIPS vs. paracentesis for
cirrhotic patients with refractory ascites. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2006:CD004889.
[107] Salerno F, Camma C, Enea M, Rossle M, Wong F. Transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt for refractory ascites: a meta-analysis
of individual patient data. Gastroenterology 2007;133:825–834
.
[108] Maleux G, Perez-Gutierrez NA, Evrard S, Mroue A, Le Moine O, Laleman
W, et al. Covered stents are better than uncovered stents for
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts in cirrhotic patients
with refractory ascites: a retrospective cohort study. Acta Gastroenterol
Belg 2010;73:336–341
.
[109] Tan HK, James PD, Sniderman KW, Wong F. Long-term clinical outcome
of patients with cirrhosis and refractory ascites treated with tran-
sjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt insertion. J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2015;30:389–395
.
[110] Gaba RC, Parvinian A, Casadaban LC, Couture PM, Zivin SP, Lakhoo J,
et al. Survival beneﬁt of TIPS vs. serial paracentesis in patients with
refractory ascites: a single institution case-control propensity score
analysis. Clin Radiol 2015;70:e51–e57
.
[111] Bureau C, Thabut D, Oberti F, Dharancy S, Carbonell N, Bouvier A, et al.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts with covered stents
increase transplant-free survival of patients with cirrhosis and recur-
rent ascites. Gastroenterology 2017;152:157–163
.
[112] Malinchoc M, Kamath PS, Gordon FD, Peine CJ, Rank J, ter Borg PC. A
model to predict poor survival in patients undergoing transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunts. Hepatology 2000;31:864–871
.
[113] Bureau C, Metivier S, D’Amico M, Peron JM, Otal P, Pagan JC, et al. Serum
bilirubin and platelet count: a simple predictive model for survival in
patients with refractory ascites treated by TIPS. J Hepatol
2011;54:901–907
.
[114] Sarwar A, Zhou L, Novack V, Tapper EB, Curry M, Malik R, et al. Hospital
volume and mortality after trans-jugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunt creation in the United States. Hepatology 2017
.
[115] Angeli P, Volpin R, Piovan D, Bortoluzzi A, Craighero R, Bottaro S, et al.
Acute effects of the oral administration of midodrine, an alpha-
adrenergic agonist, on renal hemodynamics and renal function in
cirrhotic patients with ascites. Hepatology 1998;28:937–943
.
[116] Singh V, Dhungana SP, Singh B, Vijayverghia R, Nain CK, Sharma N, et al.
Midodrine in patients with cirrhosis and refractory or recurrent ascites:
a randomized pilot study. J Hepatol 2012;56:348–354
.
[117] Gadano A, Moreau R, Vachiery F, Soupison T, Yang S, Cailmail S, et al.
Natriuretic response to the combination of atrial natriuretic peptide
and terlipressin in patients with cirrhosis and refractory ascites. J
Hepatol 1997;26:1229–1234
.
[118] Krag A, Moller S, Henriksen JH, Holstein-Rathlou NH, Larsen FS,
Bendtsen F. Terlipressin improves renal function in patients with
cirrhosis and ascites without hepatorenal syndrome. Hepatology
2007;46:1863–1871
.
[119] Lenaerts A, Codden T, Meunier JC, Henry JP, Ligny G. Effects of clonidine
on diuretic response in ascitic patients with cirrhosis and activation of
sympathetic nervous system. Hepatology 2006;44:844–849
.
[120] Singh V, Singh A, Singh B, Vijayvergiya R, Sharma N, Ghai A, et al.
Midodrine and clonidine in patients with cirrhosis and refractory or
recurrent ascites: a randomized pilot study. Am J Gastroenterol
2013;108:560–567
.
[121] Rai N, Singh B, Singh A, Vijayvergiya R, Sharma N, Bhalla A, et al.
Midodrine and tolvaptan in patients with cirrhosis and refractory
or recurrent ascites: a randomised pilot study. Liver Int 2017;37:
406–414
.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
44 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[122] Tandon P, Tsuyuki RT, Mitchell L, Hoskinson M, Ma MM, Wong WW,
et al. The effect of 1 month of therapy with midodrine, octreotide-LAR
and albumin in refractory ascites: a pilot study. Liver Int 2009;29:
169–174
.
[123] Hanafy AS, Hassaneen AM. Rifaximin and midodrine improve clinical
outcome in refractory ascites including renal function, weight loss, and
short-term survival. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;28:1455–1461
.
[124] Bellot P, Welker MW, Soriano G, von Schaewen M, Appenrodt B, Wiest
R, et al. Automated low ﬂow pump system for the treatment of
refractory ascites: a multi-center safety and efﬁcacy study. J Hepatol
2013;58:922–927
.
[125] Stirnimann G, Berg T, Spahr L, Zeuzem S, McPherson S, Lammert F, et al.
Treatment of refractory ascites with an automated low-ﬂow ascites
pump in patients with cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2017;46:981–991
.
[126] Bureau C, Adebayo D, Chalret de Rieu M, Elkrief L, Valla D, et al.
Alfapump
/C210system vs. large volume paracentesis for refractory ascites:
A multicenter randomized controlled study. J Hepatol
2017;67:940–949
.
[127] Sola E, Sanchez-Cabus S, Rodriguez E, Elia C, Cela R, Moreira R, et al.
Effects of alfapump system on kidney and circulatory function in
patients with cirrhosis and refractory ascites. Liver Transpl
2017;23:583–593
.
[128] Badillo R, Rockey DC. Hepatic hydrothorax. Clinical features, manage-
ment, and outcomes in 77 patients and review of the literature.
Medicine 2014;93:135–142
.
[129] Garbuzenko DV, Arefyev NO. Hepatic hydrothorax: An update and
review of the literature. World J Hepatol 2017:1197–1204
.
[130] Zenda T, Miyamoto S, Murata S, Mabuchi H. Detection of diaphragmatic
defect as the cause of severe hepatic hydrothorax with magnetic
resonance imaging. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;9:2288–2289
.
[131] Hewett LJ, Bradshaw ML, Gordon LL, Rockey DC. Diagnosis of isolated
hepatic hydrothorax using peritoneal scintigraphy. Hepatology
2016;64:1364–1366.
[132] Alonso JC. Pleural effusion in liver disease. Semin Respir Crit Care Med
2010;31:698–705
.
[133] Orman ES, Lok AS. Outcomes of patients with chest tube insertion for
hepatic hydrothorax. Hepatol Int 2009;3:582–586
.
[134] Xiol X, Tremosa G, Castellote J, Gornals J, Lama C, et al. Liver
transplantation in patients with hepatic hydrothorax. Transpl Int
2005;18:672–675
.
[135] Sersté T, Moreno C, Francoz C, Razek WA, Paugham C, et al. The impact
of preoperative hepatic hydrothorax on the outcome of adult liver
transplantation. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;22:207–212
.
[136] Gordon FD, Anastopoulos HT, Crenshaw W, Gilchrist B, McEniff N,
Falchuk KR, et al. The successful treatment of symptomatic, refractory
hepatic hydrothorax with transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunt. Hepatology 1997;25:1366–1369
.
[137] Siegerstetter V, Deibert P, Ochs A, Olschewski M, Blum HE, Rossle M.
Treatment of refractory hepatic hydrothorax with transjugular intra-
hepatic portosystemic shunt: long-term results in 40 patients. Eur J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2001;13:529–534
.
[138] Ditah IC, Al Bawardy BF, Saberi B, Ditah C, Kamath PS. Transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt for medically refractory hepatic
hydrothorax: A systematic review and cumulative meta-analysis.
World J Hepatol 2015;7:1797–1806
.
[139] Hou F, Qi X, Guo X. Effectiveness and safety of pleurodesis for hepatic
hydrothorax: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Dig Dis Sci
2016;61:3321–3334
.
[140] Huang PM, Kuo SW, Chen JS, Lee JM. Thoracoscopic mesh repair of
diaphragmatic defects in hepatic hydrothorax: A 10-year experience.
Ann Thorac Surg 2016;101:1921–1927
.
[141] Angeli P, Wong F, Watson H. Gines P, and the participants to CAPPS.
Hyponatremia in cirrhosis: results of a survey. Hepatology
2006;44:1535–1542
.
[142] Gines P, Berl T, Bernardi M, Bichet DG, Hamon G, Jimenez W, et al.
Hyponatremia in cirrhosis: from pathogenesis to treatment. Hepatol-
ogy 1998;28:851–864
.
[143] Spasovski G, Vanholder R, Allolio B, Annane D, Ball S, Bichet D, et al.
Clinical practice guideline on diagnosis and treatment of hypona-
traemia. Intensive Care Med 2014;40:320–331
.
[144] Biggins SW, Rodriguez HJ, Bacchetti P, Bass NM, Roberts JP, Terrault NA.
Serum sodium predicts mortality in patients listed for liver transplan-
tation. Hepatology 2005;41:32–39
.
[145] Porcel A, Diaz F, Rendon P, Macias M, Martin-Herrera L, Giron-Gonzalez
JA. Dilutional hyponatremia in patients with cirrhosis and ascites. Arch
Intern Med 2002;162:323–328 ;
Cordoba J, Garcia-Martinez R, Simon-Talero M. Hyponatremic and
hepatic encephalopathies: similarities, differences and coexistence.
Metab Brain Dis 2010;25:73–80
.
[146] Cordoba J, Garcia-Martinez R, Simon-Talero M. Hyponatremic and
hepatic encephalopathies: similarities, differences and coexistence.
Metab Brain Dis 2010;25:73–80
.
[147] Amodio P, Del Piccolo F, Petteno E, Mapelli D, Angeli P, Iemmolo R, et al.
Prevalence and prognostic value of quantiﬁed electroencephalogram
(EEG) alterations in cirrhotic patients. J Hepatol 2001;35:37–45
.
[148] Londono MC, Guevara M, Rimola A, Navasa M, Taura P, Mas A, et al.
Hyponatremia impairs early posttransplantation outcome in patients
with cirrhosis undergoing liver transplantation. Gastroenterology
2006;130:1135–1143
.
[149] Biggins SW, Kim WR, Terrault NA, Saab S, Balan V, Schiano T, et al.
Evidence-based incorporation of serum sodium concentration into
MELD. Gastroenterology 2006;130:1652–1660
.
[150] Kim WR, Biggins SW, Kremers WK, Wiesner RH, Kamath PS, Benson JT,
et al. Hyponatremia and mortality among patients on the liver-
transplant waiting list. N Engl J Med 2008;359:1018–1026
.
[151] McCormick PA, Mistry P, Kaye G, Burroughs AK, McIntyre N. Intra-
venous albumin infusion is an effective therapy for hyponatraemia in
cirrhotic patients with ascites. Gut 1990;31:204–207
.
[152] Quittnat F, Gross P. Vaptans and the treatment of water-retaining
disorders. Semin Nephrol 2006;26:234–243
.
[153] Cardenas A, Gines P, Marotta P, Czerwiec F, Oyuang J, Guevara M, et al.
Tolvaptan, an oral vasopressin antagonist, in the treatment of hypona-
tremia in cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2012;56:571–578
.
[154] Gerbes AL, Gulberg V, Gines P, Decaux G, Gross P, Gandjini H, et al.
Therapy of hyponatremia in cirrhosis with a vasopressin receptor
antagonist: a randomized double-blind multicenter trial. Gastroen-
terology 2003;124:933–939
.
[155] Gines P, Wong F, Watson H, Milutinovic S, del Arbol LR, Olteanu D.
Effects of satavaptan, a selective vasopressin V(2) receptor antagonist,
on ascites and serum sodium in cirrhosis with hyponatremia: a
randomized trial. Hepatology 2008;48:204–213
.
[156] O’Leary JG, Davis GL. Conivaptan increases serum sodium in hypona-
tremic patients with end-stage liver disease. Liver Transpl
2009;15:1325–1329
.
[157] Wong F, Gines P, Watson H, Horsmans Y, Angeli P, Gow P, et al. Effects
of a selective vasopressin V2 receptor antagonist, satavaptan, on ascites
recurrence after paracentesis in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol
2010;53:283–290
.
[158] Wong F, Watson H, Gerbes A, Vilstrup H, Badalamenti S, Bernardi M,
et al. Satavaptan for the management of ascites in cirrhosis: efﬁcacy
and safety across the spectrum of ascites severity. Gut
2012;61:108–116
.
[159] Pose E, Sola E, Piano S, Gola E, Graupera I, Guevara M, et al. Limited
efﬁcacy of tolvaptan in patients with cirrhosis and severe hypona-
tremia: real-life experience. Am J Med 2017;130:372–375
.
[160] Torres VE, Chapman AB, Devuyst O, Gansevoort RT, Grantham JJ,
Higashihara E, et al. Tolvaptan in patients with autosomal dominant
polycystic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2012;367:2407–2418 .
[161] Bosch J, Groszmann RJ, Shah VH. Evolution in the understanding of the
pathophysiological basis of portal hypertension: How changes in
paradigm are leading to successful new treatments. J Hepatol
2015;62:S121–S130
.
[162] D’Amico G, De Franchis R. Upper digestive bleeding in cirrhosis. Post-
therapeutic outcome and prognostic indicators. Hepatology
2003;38:599–612.
[163] Jepsen P, Ott P, Andersen PK, Sorensen HT, Vilstrup H. Clinical course of
alcoholic liver cirrhosis: a Danish population-based cohort study.
Hepatology 2010;51:1675–1682
.
[164] Kovalak M, Lake J, Mattek N, Eisen G, Lieberman D, Zaman A.
Endoscopic screening for varices in cirrhotic patients: data from a
national endoscopic database. Gastrointest Endosc 2007;65:82–88 .
[165] Merli M, Nicolini G, Angeloni S, Rinaldi V, De Santis A, Merkel C, et al.
Incidence and natural history of small esophageal varices in cirrhotic
patients. J Hepatol 2003;38:266–272
.
[166] Groszmann RJ, Garcia-Tsao G, Bosch J, Grace ND, Burroughs AK, Planas
R, et al. Beta-blockers to prevent gastroesophageal varices in patients
with cirrhosis. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2254–2261
.
[167] Abraldes JG, Bureau C, Stefanescu H, Augustin S, Ney M, Blasco H, et al.
Non invasive tools and risk of clinically signiﬁcant portal hypertension
and varices in compensated cirrhosis : the ‘‘ANTICIPATE” study.
Hepatology 2016;64:2173–2184
.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 45
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[168] De Franchis RBaveno VI faculty. Expanding consensus in portal
hypertension: report of the BAVENO VI Consensus Workshop: Strati-
fying risk and individualizing care for portal hypertension. J Hepatol
2015;63:743–752
.
[169] Garcia-Tsao G, Sanyal AJ, Grace ND, Carey WPractice Guidelines
Committee of the American Association for the Study of Liver
DiseasesPractice Parameters Committee of the American College of
Gastroenterology. Prevention and management of gastroesophageal
varices and variceal hemorrhage in cirrhosis. Hepatology
2007;46:922–938
.
[170] North Italian Endoscopic Club for the Study and Treatment of
Esophageal Varices. Prediction of the ﬁrst variceal hemorrhage in
patients with cirrhosis of the liver and esophageal varices. A prospec-
tive multicenter study. N Engl J Med 1988;319:983–989
.
[171] D’Amico G, Pasta L, Morabito A, et al. Competing risks and prognostic
stages of cirrhosis: a 25-year inception cohort study of 494 patients.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2014;39:1180–1193
.
[172] Augustin S, Muntaner L, Altamirano JT, Gonzalez A, Saperas E, Dot J,
et al. Predicting early mortality after acute variceal hemorrhage based
on classiﬁcation and regression tree analysis. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2009;7:1347–1354
.
[173] Bosch J, Garcia-Pagan JC. Prevention of variceal rebleeding. Lancet
2003;361:952–954
.
[174] Garcia-Pagan JC, De Gottardi A, Bosch J. Review article: the modern
management of portal hypertension–primary and secondary prophy-
laxis of variceal bleeding in cirrhotic patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2008;28:178–186
.
[175] Hernandez-Gea V, Aracil C, Colomo A, Garupera I, Poca M, Torras X,
et al. Development of ascites in compensated cirrhosis with severe
portal hypertension treated with beta-blockers. Am J Gastroenterol
2012;107:418–427
.
[176] Puente A, Hernandez-Gea V, Graupera I, Roque M, Colomo A, Poca M,
et al. Drugs plus ligation to prevent rebleeding in cirrhosis: an updated
systematic review. Liver Int 2014;34:823–833 .
[177] Villanueva C, Graupera I, Aracil C, Alvarado E, Minana J, Puente A, et al.
A randomized trial to assess whether portal pressure guided therapy to
prevent variceal rebleeding improves survival in cirrhosis. Hepatology
2017;65:1693–1707
.
[178] D’Amico G, Pagliaro L, Bosch J. Pharmacological treatment of portal
hypertension: an evidence-based approach. Semin Liver Dis
1999;19:475–505
.
[179] Albillos A, Banares R, Gonzalez M, Ripoll C, Gonzalez R, Catalina MV,
et al. Value of the hepatic venous pressure gradient to monitor drug
therapy for portal hypertension: a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol
2007;102:1116–1126
.
[180] Li T, Ke W, Sun P, Chen X, Belgaumkar A, Huang Y, et al. Carvedilol for
portal hypertension in cirrhosis: systematic review with meta-analysis.
BMJ Open 2016;6:e010902
.
[181] Serste T, Melot C, Francoz C, Durand F, Rautou PE, Valla D, et al.
Deleterious effects of beta-blockers on survival in patients with
cirrhosis and refractory ascites. Hepatology 2010;52:1017–1022
.
[182] Wiest R, Albillos A, Gluud LL. The window hypothesis: haemodynamic
and non-haemodynamic effects of beta-blockers improve survival of
patients with cirrhosis during a window in the disease. Gut
2012;61:967–969
.
[183] Bossen L, Krag A, Vilstrup H, Watson H, Jepsen P. Non-selective beta-
blockers do not affect mortality in cirrhosis patients with ascites: Post
hoc analysis of three RCTs with 1198 patients. Hepatology
2016;63:1968–1976
.
[184] Bang UC, Benﬁeld T, Hyldstrup L, Jensen JE, Bendtsen F. Effect of
propranolol on survival in patients with decompensated cirrhosis: a
nationwide study based Danish patient registers. Liver Int
2016;36:1304–1312
.
[185] Reiberger T, Mandorfer M. Beta adrenergic blockade and decompen-
sated cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2017;66:849–859 .
[186] Leithead JA, Rajoriya N, Tehami N, Hodson J, Gunson BK, Tripathi D,
et al. Non-selective b-blockers are associated with improved survival in
patients with ascites listed for liver transplantation. Gut 2015;64:
1111–1119
.
[187] Senzolo M, Cholongitas E, Burra P, Leandro G, Thalheimer U, Patch D,
et al. Beta-blockers protect against spontaneous bacterial peritonitis in
cirrhotic patients: a meta-analysis. Liver Int 2009;29:1189–1193
.
[188] Reiberger T, Ferlitsch A, Payer BA, Mandorfer M, Heinisch BB, Hayden H,
et al. Non-selective beta-blocker therapy decreases intestinal perme-
ability and serum levels of LBP and IL-6 in patients with cirrhosis. J
Hepatol 2013;58:911–921
.
[189] Mookerjee RP, Pavesi M, Thomsen KL, Mehta G, Macnaughtan J,
Bendtsen F, et al. Treatment with non-selective beta blockers is
associated with reduced severity of systemic inﬂammation and
improved survival of patients with acute-on-chronic liver failure. J
Hepatol 2016;64:574–582
.
[190] Madsen BS, Nielsen KF, Fialla AD, Krag A. Keep the sick from harm in
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis: Dose of beta blockers matters. J
Hepatol 2016;64:1455–1456 .
[191] Serste T, Gustot T, Rautou PE, Francoz C, Njimi H, Durand F, et al. Severe
hyponatremia is a better predictor of mortality than MELDNa in
patients with cirrhosis and refractory ascites. J Hepatol 2012;57:
274–280
.
[192] Krag A, Bendtsen F, Henriksen JH, Moller S. Low cardiac output predicts
development of hepatorenal syndrome and survival in patients with
cirrhosis and ascites. Gut 2010;59:105–110
.
[193] Ruiz-del-Arbol L, Urman J, Fernandez J, Gonzalez M, Navasa M,
Monescillo A, et al. Systemic, renal, and hepatic hemodynamic
derangement in cirrhotic patients with spontaneous bacterial peritoni-
tis. Hepatology 2003;38:1210–1218
.
[194] Payance A, Bissonnette J, Roux O, Elkrief L, Gault N, Francoz C, et al. Lack
of clinical or haemodynamic rebound after abrupt interruption of beta-
blockers in patients with cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2016;43:966–973
.
[195] Garcia-Tsao G, Bosch J. Management of varices and variceal hemor-
rhage in cirrhosis. N Engl J Med 2010;362:823–832
.
[196] Villanueva C, Escorsell A. Optimizing general management of acute
variceal bleeding in cirrhosis. Curr Hepatol Rep 2014;13:198–207 .
[197] Avgerinos A, Nevens F, Raptis S, Fevery J. Early administration of
somatostatin and efﬁcacy of sclerotherapy in acute oesophageal
variceal bleeds: the European Acute Bleeding Oesophageal
Variceal Episodes (ABOVE) randomised trial. Lancet 1997;350:
1495–1499
.
[198] Levacher S, Letoumelin P, Pateron D, Blaise M, Lapandry C, Pourriat JL.
Early administration of terlipressin plus glyceryl trinitrate to control
active upper gastrointestinal bleeding in cirrhotic patients. Lancet
1995;346:865–868
.
[199] Garcia-Tsao G, Abraldes JG, Berzigotti A, Bosch J. Portal hypertensive
bleeding in cirrhosis: Risk stratiﬁcation, diagnosis, and management:
2016 practice guidance by the American Association for the study of
liver diseases. Hepatology 2017;65:310–335
.
[200] Myburgh JA. Fluid resuscitation in acute illness–time to reappraise the
basics. N Engl J Med 2011;364:2543–2544
.
[201] Villanueva C, Colomo A, Bosch A, Concepcion M, Hernandez-Gea V,
Aracil C, et al. Transfusion strategies for acute upper gastrointestinal
bleeding. N Engl J Med 2013;368:11–21
.
[202] Seo YS, Park SY, Kim MY, Kim JH, Park JY, Yim HJ, et al. Lack of difference
among terlipressin, somatostatin, and octreotide in the control of
acute gastroesophageal variceal hemorrhage. Hepatology 2014;60:
954–963
.
[203] Azam Z, Hamid S, Jafri W, Salih M, Abbas Z, Abid S, et al. Short course
adjuvant terlipressin in acute variceal bleeding: a randomized double
blind dummy controlled trial. J Hepatol 2012;56:819–824
.
[204] Altraif I, Handoo FA, Aljumah A, Alalwan A, Dafalla M, Saeed AM, et al.
Effect of erythromycin before endoscopy in patients presenting with
variceal bleeding: a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Gastrointest Endosc 2011;73:245–250
.
[205] Banares R, Albillos A, Rincon D, Alonso S, Gonzalez M, Ruiz-del-Arbol L,
et al. Endoscopic treatment vs. endoscopic plus pharmacologic treat-
ment for acute variceal bleeding: a meta-analysis. Hepatology
2002;35:609–615
.
[206] Villanueva C, Piqueras M, Aracil C, Gomez C, Lopez-Balaguer JM,
Gonzalez B, et al. A randomized controlled trial comparing ligation and
sclerotherapy as emergency endoscopic treatment added to somato-
statin in acute variceal bleeding. J Hepatol 2006;45:560–567
.
[207] Rios Castellanos E, Seron P, Gisbert JP, Bonﬁll Cosp X. Endoscopic
injection of cyanoacrylate glue vs. other endoscopic procedures for
acute bleeding gastric varices in people with portal hypertension.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;5:CD010180
.
[208] Bernard B, Grange JD, Khac EN, Amiot X, Opolon P, Poynard T. Antibiotic
prophylaxis for the prevention of bacterial infections in cirrhotic
patients with gastrointestinal bleeding: a meta-analysis. Hepatology
1999;29:1655–1661
.
[209] Fernandez J, Ruiz del Arbol L, Gomez C, Durandez R, Serradilla R,
Guarner C, et al. Norﬂoxacin vs ceftriaxone in the prophylaxis of
infections in patients with advanced cirrhosis and hemorrhage.
Gastroenterology 2006;131:1049–1056
.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
46 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[210] Tandon P, Abraldes JG, Keough A, Bastiampillai R, Jayakumar S,
Carbonneau M, et al. Risk of bacterial infection in patients with
cirrhosis and acute variceal hemorrhage, based on child-pugh class, and
effects of antibiotics. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:1189–1196
.
[211] Cardenas A, Gines P, Uriz J, Bessa X, Salmeron JM, Mas A, et al. Renal
failure after upper gastrointestinal bleeding in cirrhosis: incidence,
clinical course, predictive factors, and short-term prognosis. Hepatol-
ogy 2001;34:671–676
.
[212] Shaheen NJ, Stuart E, Schmitz SM, Mitchell KL, Fried MW, Zacks S, et al.
Pantoprazole reduces the size of postbanding ulcers after variceal band
ligation: a randomized, controlled trial. Hepatology 2005;41:588–594
.
[213] Escorsell A, Pavel O, Cardenas A, Morillas R, Llop E, Villanueva C, et al.
Esophageal balloon tamponade vs. esophageal stent in controlling acute
refractory variceal bleeding: A multicenter randomized, controlled
trial. Hepatology 2016;63:1957–1996
.
[214] Monescillo A, Martínez-Lagares F, Ruiz-del-Arbol L, et al. Inﬂuence of
portal hypertension and its early decompression by TIPS placement on
the outcome of variceal bleeding. Hepatology 2004;40:793–801
.
[215] García-Pagán JC, Caca K, Bureau C, et al. Early use of TIPS in patients
with cirrhosis and variceal bleeding. N Engl J Med 2010;362:
2370–2379.
[216] Garcia-Pagan JC, Di Pascoli M, Caca K, Laleman W, Bureau C, Appenrodt
B, et al. Use of early-TIPS for high-risk variceal bleeding: results of a
post-RCT surveillance study. J Hepatol 2013;58:45–50
.
[217] Rudler M, Cluzel P, Corvec TL, Benosman H, Rousseau G, Poynard T,
et al. Early-TIPSS placement prevents rebleeding inhigh-risk patients
with variceal bleeding, without improving survival. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther 2014;40:1074–1080
.
[218] Augustin S, Altamirano J, Gonzalez A, Dot J, Abu-Suboh M, Armengol JR,
et al. Effectiveness of combined pharmacologic and ligation therapy in
high-risk patients with acute esophageal variceal bleeding. Am J
Gastroenterol 2011;106:1787–1795
.
[219] Reverter E, Tandon P, Augustin S, Turon F, Casu S, Bastiampillai R, et al.
A MELD-based model to determine risk of mortality among patients
with acute variceal bleeding. Gastroenterology 2014;146:412–419
.
[220] Merli M, Nicolini G, Angeloni S, Gentili F, Attili AF, Riggio O. The natural
history of portal hypertensive gastropathy in patients with liver
cirrhosis and mild portal hypertension. Am J Gastroenterol
2004;99:1959–1965
.
[221] Thuluvath PJ, Yoo HY. Portal Hypertensive gastropathy. Am J Gastroen-
terol 2002;97:2973–2978
.
[222] Yoshikawa I, Murata I, Nakano S, Otsuki M. Effects of endoscopic
variceal ligation on portal hypertensive gastropathy and gastric
mucosal blood ﬂow. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:71–74
.
[223] Urrunaga NH, Rockey DC. Portal hypertensive gastropathy and colopa-
thy. Clin Liver Dis 2014;18:389–406 .
[224] Hosking SW, Kennedy HJ, Seddon I, Triger DR. The role of propranolol in
congestive gastropathy of portal hypertension. Hepatology
1987;7:437–441
.
[225] Perez-Ayuso RM, Pique JM, Bosch J, Panes J, Gonzalez A, Perez R, et al.
Propranolol in prevention of recurrent bleeding from severe portal
hypertensive gastropathy in cirrhosis. Lancet 1991;337:1431–1434
.
[226] Ripoll C, Garcia-Tsao G. Treatment of gastropathy and gastric antral
vascular ectasia in patients with portal hypertension. Curr Treat
Options Gastroenterol 2007;10:483–494
.
[227] Kamath P, Lacerda M, Ahlquist D, McKusick MA, Andrews JC, Nagorney
DA. Gastric Mucosal Responses to intrahepatic portosystemic shunting
in patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2000;118:905–911
.
[228] Zhou Y, Qiao L, Wu J, Hu H, Xu C. Comparison of the efﬁcacy of
octreotide, vasopressin, and omeprazole in the control of acute
bleeding in patients with portal hypertensive gastropathy: a controlled
study. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2002;17:973–979
.
[229] Sarin SK, Lahoti D, Saxena SP, Murthy NS, Makwana UK. Prevalence,
classiﬁcation and natural history of gastric varices: a long-term follow-
up study in 568 portal hypertension patients. Hepatology
1992;16:1343–1349
.
[230] Mishra SR, Sharma BC, Kumar A, Sarin SK. Primary prophylaxis of
gastric variceal bleeding comparing cyanoacrylate injection and beta-
blockers: a randomized controlled trial. J Hepatol 2011;54:1161–1167
.
[231] Rios CE, Seron P, Gisbert JP, Bonﬁll CX. Endoscopic injection of
cyanoacrylate glue vs. other endoscopic procedures for acute bleeding
gastric varices in people with portal hypertension. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2015;5:CD010180
.
[232] Mishra SR, Chander Sharma B, Kumar A, Sarin SK. Endoscopic
cyanoacrylate injection vs. beta-blocker for secondary prophylaxis of
gastric variceal bleed: a randomised controlled trial. Gut
2010;59:729–735.
[233] Chau TN, Patch D, Chan YW, Nagral A, Dick R, Burroughs AK. ‘‘Salvage”
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts: gastric fundal com-
pared with esophageal variceal bleeding. Gastroenterology
1998;114:981–998
.
[234] Hung HH, Chang CJ, Hou MC, Liao WC, Chan CC, Huang HC, et al.
Efﬁcacy of non-selective beta-blockers as adjunct to endoscopic
prophylactic treatment for gastric variceal bleeding: a randomized
controlled trial. J Hepatol 2012;56:1025–1032
.
[235] Lo GH, Liang HL, Chen WC, Chen MH, Lai KH, Hsu PI, et al. A prospective,
randomized controlled trial of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunt vs. cyanoacrylate injection in the prevention of gastric variceal
rebleeding. Endoscopy 2007;39:679–685
.
[236] Saad WE. Endovascular management of gastric varices. Clin Liver Dis
2014;18:829–885
.
[237] Mookerjee RP, Stadlbauer V, Lidder S, Wright GA, Hodges SJ, Davies NA,
et al. Neutrophil dysfunction in alcoholic hepatitis superimposed on
cirrhosis is reversible and predicts the outcome. Hepatology
2007;46:831–840
.
[238] Wasmuth HE, Kunz D, Yagmur E, Timmer-Stranghoner A, Vidacek D,
Siewert E, et al. Patients with acute on chronic liver failure display
‘‘sepsis-like” immune paralysis. J Hepatol 2005;42:195–201
.
[239] Wiest R, Garcia-Tsao G. Bacterial translocation (BT) in cirrhosis.
Hepatology 2005;41:422–433
.
[240] Appenrodt B, Grunhage F, Gentemann MG, Thyssen L, Sauerbruch T,
Lammert F. Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2
(NOD2) variants are genetic risk factors for death and spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis in liver cirrhosis. Hepatology 2010;51:
1327–1333
.
[241] Fernandez J, Navasa M, Gomez J, et al. Bacterial infections in cirrhosis:
epidemiological changes with invasive procedures and norﬂoxacin
prophylaxis. Hepatology 2002;35:140–148
.
[242] Fasolato S, Angeli P, Dallagnese L, et al. Renal failure and bacterial
infections in patients with cirrhosis: epidemiology and clinical features.
Hepatology 2007;45:223–229
.
[243] Piano S, Fasolato S, Salinas F, Romano A, Tonon M, Morando F, et al. The
empirical antibiotic treatment of nosocomial spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis: Results of a randomized, controlled clinical trial. Hepatol-
ogy 2016;63:1299–1309
.
[244] Runyon BA. The evolution of ascitic ﬂuid analysis in the diagnosis of
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Runyon BA. Am J Gastroenterol
2003;98:1675–1677
.
[245] Evans LT, Kim WR, Poterucha JJ, Kamath PS. Spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis in asymptomatic outpatients with cirrhotic ascites. Hepa-
tology 2003;37:897–901
.
[246] Kim JJ, Tsukamoto MM, Mathur AK, Ghomri YM, Hou LA, Sheibani S,
et al. Delayed paracentesis is associated with increased in-hospital
mortality in patients with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2014;109:1436–1442
.
[247] Van de Geijn GM, van Gent M, van Pul-Bom N, Beunis MH, van Tilburg
AJ, Njo TL. A new ﬂow cytometric method for differential cell counting
in ascitic ﬂuid. Cytometry B Clin Cytom 2016;90:506–511 .
[248] Fleming C, Brouwer R, van Alphen A, Lindemans J, de Jonge R. UF-1000i:
validation of the body ﬂuid mode for counting cells in body ﬂuids. Clin
Chem Lab Med 2014;52:1781–1790
.
[249] Gülberg V, Gerbes AL, Sauerbruch T, Appenrodt B. Insufﬁcient sensi-
tivity of reagent strips for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Hepatology
2007;46:1669
.
[250] Bellot P, García-Pagán JC, Francés R, Abraldes JG, Navasa M, Pérez-
Mateo M, et al. Bacterial DNA translocation is associated with systemic
circulatory abnormalities and intrahepatic endothelial dysfunction in
patients with cirrhosis. Hepatology 2010;52:2044–2052
.
[251] Bruns T, Reuken PA, Stengel S, Gerber L, Appenrodt B, Schade JH, et al.
The prognostic signiﬁcance of bacterial DNA in patients with decom-
pensated cirrhosis and suspected infection. Liver Int 2016;36:
1133–1142
.
[252] Runyon BA, Hoefs JC. Culture-negative neutrocytic ascites: a variant of
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Hepatology 1984;4:1209–1211
.
[253] Gravito-Soares M, Gravito-Soares E, Lopes S, Ribeiro G, Figueiredo P.
Spontaneous fungal peritonitis: a rare but severe complication of liver
cirrhosis. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;29:1010–1016
.
[254] Chen CH, Shih CM, Chou JW, Liu YH, Hang LW, Hsia TC, et al. Outcome
predictors of cirrhotic patients with spontaneous bacterial empyema.
Liver Int 2011;31:417–424
.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 47
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[255] Xiol X, Castellvi JM, Guardiola J, Sese E, Castellote J, Perello A, et al.
Spontaneous bacterial empyema in cirrhotic patients: a prospective
study. Hepatology 1996;23:719–723
.
[256] Soriano G, Castellote J, Alvarez C, Girbau A, Gordillo J, Baliellas C, et al.
Secondary bacterial peritonitis in cirrhosis: a retrospective study of
clinical and analytical characteristics, diagnosis and management. J
Hepatol 2010;52:39–44
.
[257] Rimola A, Salmeron JM, Clemente G, Rodrigo L, Obrador A, Miranda ML,
et al. Two different dosages of cefotaxime in the treatment of
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis in cirrhosis: results of a prospective,
randomized, multicenter study. Hepatology 1995;21:674–679
.
[258] Runyon Runyon BA, McHutchison JG, Antillon MR, Akriviadis EA,
Montano AA. Short-course vs. long-course antibiotic treatment of
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. A randomized controlled study of
100 patients. Gastroenterology 1991;100:1737–1742
.
[259] Ricart E, Soriano G, Novella MT, Ortiz J, Sabat M, Kolle L, et al.
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid vs. cefotaxime in the therapy of bacterial
infections in cirrhotic patients. J Hepatol 2000;32:596–602
.
[260] deLemos AS, Ghabril M, Rockey DC, Gu J, Barnhart HX, Fontana RJ, et al.
Drug-induced liver injury network (DILIN). Amoxicillin-clavulanate-
induced liver injury. Dig Dis Sci 2016;61:2406–2416 .
[261] Terg R, Cobas S, Fassio E, Landeira G, Rios B, Vasen W, et al. Oral
ciproﬂoxacin after a short course of intravenous ciproﬂoxacin in the
treatment of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis: results of a multicenter,
randomized study. J Hepatol 2000;33:564–569
.
[262] Angeli P, Guarda S, Fasolato S, Miola E, Craighero R, Piccolo F, et al.
Switch therapy with ciproﬂoxacin vs. intravenous ceftazidime in the
treatment of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis in patients with cirrho-
sis: similar efﬁcacy at lower cost. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2006;23:75–84
.
[263] Navasa M, Follo A, Llovet JM, Clemente G, Vargas V, Rimola A, et al.
Randomized, comparative study of oral oﬂoxacin vs. intravenous
cefotaxime in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Gastroenterology
1996;111:1011–1017
.
[264] Fernandez J, Bert F, Nicolas-Chanoine MH. The challenges of multi-
drug-resistance in hepatology. J Hepatol 2016;65:1043–1054
.
[265] Magiorakos AP, Srinivasan A, Carey RB, Carmeli Y, Falagas ME, Giske CG,
et al. Multidrug-resistant, extensively drug-resistant and pandrug-
resistant bacteria: an international expert proposal for interim stan-
dard deﬁnitions for acquired resistance. Clin Microbiol Infect
2012;18:268–281
.
[266] Fernandez J, Acevedo J, Castro M, Garcia O, de Lope CR, Roca D, et al.
Prevalence and risk factors of infections by multiresistant bacteria in
cirrhosis: a prospective study. Hepatology 2012;55:1551–1561
.
[267] Wiest R, Krag A, Gerbes A. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis: recent
guidelines and beyond. Gut 2012;61:297–310
.
[268] Piano S, Brocca A, Mareso S, Angeli P. Infections complicating cirrhosis.
Liver Int 2018;38:126–133 .
[269] Lutz P, Nischalke HD, Kramer B, Goeser F, Kaczmarek DJ, Schlabe S, et al.
Antibiotic resistance in healthcare-related and nosocomial sponta-
neous bacterial peritonitis. Eur J Clin Invest 2017;47:44–52
.
[270] Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, Shankar-Hari M, Annane D,
Bauer M, et al. The third international consensus deﬁnitions for sepsis
and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016;315:801–810 .
[271] Piano S, Bartoletti M, Tonon M, Baldassarre M, Chies G, Romano A, et al.
Assessment of Sepsis-3 criteria and quick SOFA in patients with
cirrhosis and bacterial infections. Gut 2017
.
[272] Sort P, Navasa M, Arroyo V, Aldeguer X, Planas R, Ruiz-del-Arbol L, et al.
Effect of intravenous albumin on renal impairment and mortality in
patients with cirrhosis and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. N EnglJ
Med 1999;341:403–409
.
[273] Garioud A, Cadranel JF, Pauwels A, Nousbaum JB, Thévenot T, Dao T,
et al. Association Nationale des Hépato-gastroentérologues des Hôpi-
taux Généraux de France, Association Française pour l’Etude du Foie,
Club de Réﬂexion des Cabinets et Groupes d’Hépato-Gastroentérologie.
Albumin Use in Patients With Cirrhosis in France: Results of the ‘‘ALBU-
LIVE” Survey: A Case for Better EASL Guidelines Diffusion and/or
Revision. J Clin Gastroenterol 2017;51:831–838
.
[274] Poca M, Concepcion M, Casas M, Alvarez-Urturi C, Gordillo J, Hernan-
dez-Gea V, et al. Role of albumin treatment in patients with sponta-
neous bacterial peritonitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;10:
309–315
.
[275] Fernandez J, Tandon P, Mensa J, Garcia-Tsao G. Antibiotic prophylaxis in
cirrhosis: Good and bad. Hepatology 2016;63:2019–2031 .
[276] Fernandez J, Navasa M, Planas R, Montoliu S, Monfort D, Soriano G, et al.
Primary prophylaxis of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis delays hepa-
torenal syndrome and improves survival in cirrhosis. Gastroenterology
2007;133:818–824
.
[277] Terg R, Fassio E, Guevara M, Cartier M, Longo C, Lucero R, et al.
Ciproﬂoxacin in primary prophylaxis of spontaneous bacterial peri-
tonitis: A randomized, placebo-controlled study. J Hepatol
2008;48:774–779
.
[278] Loomba R, Wesley R, Bain A, et al. Role of ﬂuoroquinolones in the
primary prophylaxis of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis: meta-analy-
sis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009;7:487–493
.
[279] Saab S, Hernandez JC, Chi AC, et al. Oral antibiotic prophylaxis reduces
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis occurrence and improves short-term
survival in cirrhosis: a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104:
993–1001
.
[280] Krag A, Wiest R, Gluud LL. Fluoroquinolones in the primary prophylaxis
of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Am J Gastroenterol
2010;105:1444–1445
.
[281] Gines P, Rimola A, Planas R, Vargas V, Marco F, Almela M, et al.
Norﬂoxacin prevents spontaneous bacterial peritonitis recurrence in
cirrhosis: results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology
1990;12:716–724
.
[282] Bauer TM, Follo A, Navasa M, Vila J, Planas R, Clemente G, et al. Daily
norﬂoxacin is more effective than weekly ruﬂoxacin in prevention of
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis recurrence. Dig Dis Sci
2002;47:1356–1361
.
[283] Terg R, Llano K, Cobas SM, Brotto C, Barrios A, Levi D, et al. Effects of oral
ciproﬂoxacin on aerobic gram-negative fecal ﬂora in patients with
cirrhosis: results of short- and long-term administration, with daily and
weekly dosages. J Hepatol 1998;29:437–442
.
[284] Bass NM, Mullen KD, Sanyal A, Poordad F, Neff G, Leevy CB, et al.
Rifaximin treatment in hepatic encephalopathy. N Engl J Med
2010;362:071–1081
.
[285] Elfert A, Abo Ali L, Soliman S, Ibrahim S, Abd-Elsalam S. Randomized-
controlled trial of rifaximin vs. norﬂoxacin for secondary prophylaxis of
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2016;28:1450–1454
.
[286] Min YW, Lim KS, Min BH, Gwak GY, Paik YH, Choi MS, et al. Proton
pump inhibitor use signiﬁcantly increases the risk of spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis in 1965 patients with cirrhosis and ascites: a
propensity score matched cohort study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2014;40:695–704
.
[287] Dam G, Vilstrup H, Watson H, Jepsen P. Proton pump inhibitors as a risk
factor for hepatic encephalopathy and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
in patients with cirrhosis with ascites. Hepatology 2016;64:
1265–1272
.
[288] Mandorfer M, Bota S, Schwabl P, Bucsics T, Pﬁsterer N, Kruzik M, et al.
Nonselective beta blockers increase risk for hepatorenal syndrome and
death in patients with cirrhosis and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
Gastroenterology 2014;146:1680–1690
.
[289] Pande C, Kumar A, Sarin SK. Addition of probiotics to norﬂoxacin does
not improve efﬁcacy in the prevention of spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis: a double-blind placebo-controlled randomized-controlled
trial. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;24:831–839
.
[290] Fernandez J, Acevedo J, Arroyo V. Response to the clinical course and
short-term mortality of cirrhotic patients with non-spontaneous bac-
terial peritonitis infections. Liver Int 2017;37:623
.
[291] Arvaniti V, D’Amico G, Fede G, Manousou P, Tsochatzis E, Pleguezuelo
M, et al. Infections in patients with cirrhosis increase mortality four-
fold and should be used in determining prognosis. Gastroenterology
2010;139:1256
.
[292] Piano S, Morando F, Carretta G, Tonon M, Vettore E, Rosi S, et al.
Predictors of early readmission in patients with cirrhosis after the
resolution of bacterial infections. Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:
1575–1583
.
[293] Bartoletti M, Giannella M, Lewis R, Caraceni P, Tedeschi S, Paul M, et al.
A prospective multicentre study of the epidemiology and outcomes of
bloodstream infection in cirrhotic patients. Clin Microbiol Infect 2017 .
[294] Merli M, Lucidi C, Di Gregorio V, Lattanzi B, Giannelli V, Giusto M, et al.
An empirical broad spectrum antibiotic therapy in health-care-associ-
ated infections improves survival in patients with cirrhosis: A ran-
domized trial. Hepatology 2016;63:1632–1639
.
[295] Fiore M, Chiodini P, Pota V, Sansone P, Passavanti MB, Leone S, et al.
Risk of spontaneous fungal peritonitis in hospitalized cirrhotic patients
with ascites: a systematic review of observational studies and meta-
analysis. Minerva Anestesiol 2017;83:1309–1316
.
[296] Piano S, Angeli P. Reply letter. Hepatology 2016;64:998–999 .
Clinical Practice Guidelines
48 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[297] Guevara M, Terra C, Nazar A, Sola E, Fernandez J, Pavesi M, et al.
Albumin for bacterial infections other than spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis in cirrhosis. A randomized, controlled study. J Hepatol
2012;57:759–765
.
[298] Thevenot T, Bureau C, Oberti F, Anty R, Louvet A, Plessier A, et al. Effect
of albumin in cirrhotic patients with infection other than spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis. A randomized trial. J Hepatol 2015;62:822–830
.
[299] Piano S, Romano A, Di Pascoli M, Angeli P. Why and how to measure
renal function in patients with liver disease. Liver Int 2017;37:
116–122
.
[300] Gonwa TA, Jennings L, Mai ML, Stark PC, Levey AS, Klintmalm GB.
Estimation of glomerular ﬁltration rates before and after orthotopic
liver transplantation: evaluation of current equations. Liver Transpl
2004;10:301–309
.
[301] Hoek FJ, Kemperman FA, Krediet RT. A comparison between cystatin C,
plasma creatinine and the Cockcroft and Gault formula for the
estimation of glomerular ﬁltration rate. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2003;18:2024–2031
.
[302] Inker LA, Schmid CH, Tighiouart H, Eckfeldt JH, Feldman HI, Greene T,
et al. Estimating glomerular ﬁltration rate from serum creatinine and
cystatin C. N Engl J Med 2012;367:20–29 .
[303] Roy L, Legault L, Pomier-Layrargues G. Glomerular ﬁltration rate
measurement in cirrhotic patients with renal failure. Clin Nephrol
1998;50:342–346
.
[304] Francoz C, Nadim MK, Baron A, Prie D, Antoine C, Belghiti J, et al.
Glomerular ﬁltration rate equations for liver-kidney transplantation in
patients with cirrhosis: validation of current recommendations. Hepa-
tology 2014;59:1514–1521
.
[305] Francoz C, Glotz D, Moreau R, Durand F. The evaluation of renal
function and disease in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol
2010;52:605–613
.
[306] Garcia-Tsao G, Parikh CR, Viola A. Acute kidney injury in cirrhosis.
Hepatology 2008;48:2064–2077 .
[307] Salerno F, Gerbes A, Gines P, Wong F, Arroyo V. Diagnosis, prevention
and treatment of hepatorenal syndrome in cirrhosis. Gut 2007;56:
310–1318
.
[308] Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV, Molitoris BA, Ronco C, Warnock DG, et al.
Acute Kidney Injury Network: report of an initiative to improve
outcomes in acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2007;11:R31
.
[309] Nadim MK, Kellum JA, Davenport A, Wong F, Davis C, Pannu N, et al.
Hepatorenal syndrome: the 8th International Consensus Conference of
the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2012;16:
R23
.
[310] Khwaja A. KDIGO clinical practice guidelines for acute kidney injury.
Nephron Clin Pract 2012;120:c179–c184
.
[311] Belcher JM, Garcia-Tsao G, Sanyal AJ, Bhogal H, Lim JK, Ansari N, et al.
Association of AKI with mortality and complications in hospitalized
patients with cirrhosis. Hepatology 2013;57:753–762
.
[312] de Carvalho JR, Villela-Nogueira CA, Luiz RR, Guzzo PL, da Silva Rosa JM,
Rocha E, et al. Acute kidney injury network criteria as a predictor of
hospital mortality in cirrhotic patients with ascites. J Clin Gastroenterol
2012;46:21–26
.
[313] Fagundes C, Barreto R, Guevara M, Garcia E, Solà E, Rodríguez E, et al. A
modiﬁed acute kidney injury classiﬁcation for diagnosis and risk
stratiﬁcation of impairment of kidney function in cirrhosis. J Hepatol
2013;59:474–481
.
[314] Piano S, Rosi S, Maresio G, Fasolato S, Cavallin M, Romano A, et al.
Evaluation of the Acute Kidney Injury Network criteria in hospi-
talized patients with c irrhosis and ascites. J Hepatol 2013;59:482–489
.
[315] Tsien CD, Rabie R, Wong F. Acute kidney injury in decompensated
cirrhosis. Gut 2013;62:131–137
.
[316] Wong F, O’Leary JG, Reddy KR, Patton H, Kamath PS, Fallon MB, et al.
New consensus deﬁnition of acute kidney injury accurately predicts 30-
day mortality in patients with cirrhosis and infection. Gastroenterology
2013;145:1280–1288
.
[317] Huelin P, Piano S, Solà E, Stanco M, Solé C, Moreira R, et al. Validation of
a staging system for acute kidney injury in patients with cirrhosis and
association with acute-on-chronic liver failure. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2017;15:438–445
.
[318] Angeli P, Gines P, Wong F, Bernardi M, Boyer TD, Gerbes A, et al.
Diagnosis and management of acute kidney injury in patients with
cirrhosis: revised consensus recommendations of the International
Club of Ascites. J Hepatol 2015;62:968–974
.
[319] Kidney Disease: Inproving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group.
KDIGO. Clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and management
of chronic kidney disease. Kidny Int 2012;2013:1–150
.
[320] Rosi S, Piano S, Frigo AC, Morando F, Fasolato S, Cavallin M, et al. New
ICA criteria for the diagnosis of acute kidney injury in cirrhotic patients:
can we use an imputed value of serum creatinine? Liver Int
2015;35:2108–2114
.
[321] Guevara M, Fernandez-Esparrach G, Alessandria C, Torre A, Terra C,
Montana X, et al. Effects of contrast media on renal function in patients
with cirrhosis: a prospective study. Hepatology 2004;40:646–651
.
[322] Umgelter A, Reindl W, Franzen M, Lenhardt C, Huber W, Schmid RM.
Renal resistive index and renal function before and after paracentesis in
patients with hepatorenal syndrome and tense ascites. Intensive Care
Med 2009;35:152–156
.
[323] Cabrera J, Falcón L, Gorriz E, Pardo MD, Granados R, Quinones A,
Maynar M. Abdominal decompression plays a major role in early
postparacentesis haemodynamic changes in cirrhotic patients with
tense ascites. Gut 2001;48:384–389
.
[324] de Cleva R, Silva FP, Zilberstein B, Machado DJ. Acute renal failure due
to abdominal compartment syndrome: report on four cases and
literature review. Rev Hospital das Clin 2001;56:123–130
.
[325] Nadim MK, Durand F, Kellum JA, Levitsky J, O’Leary JG, Karvellas CJ,
et al. Management of the critically ill patient with cirrhosis: A
multidisciplinary perspective. J Hepatol 2016;64:717–735 .
[326] Umgelter A, Reindl W, Wagner KS, Franzen M, Stock K, Schmid RM,
et al. Effects of plasma expansion with albumin and paracentesis on
haemodynamics and kidney function in critically ill cirrhotic patients
with tense ascites and hepatorenal syndrome: a prospective uncon-
trolled trial. Critical care 2008;12:R4
.
[327] Moreau R, Lebrec D. Diagnosis and treatment of acute renal failure in
patients with cirrhosis. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol
2007;21:111–123
.
[328] Moreau R, Lebrec D. Acute renal failure in patients with cirrhosis:
perspectives in the age of MELD. Hepatology 2003;37:233–243
.
[329] Fagundes C, Pepin MN, Guevara M, Barreto R, Casals G, Sola E, et al.
Urinary neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin as biomarker in the
differential diagnosis of impairment of kidney function in cirrhosis. J
Hepatol 2012;57:267–273
.
[330] Belcher JM, Sanyal AJ, Peixoto AJ, Perazella MA, Lim J, Thiessen-
Philbrook H, et al. Kidney biomarkers and differential diagnosis of
patients with cirrhosis and acute kidney injury. Hepatology
2014;60:622–632
.
[331] Qasem AA, Farag SE, Hamed E, Emara M, Bihery A, Pasha H. Urinary
biomarkers of acute kidney injury in patients with liver cirrhosis. ISRN
Nephrol 2014;2014:376795
.
[332] Barreto R, Elia C, Sola E, Moreira R, Ariza X, Rodriguez E, et al. Urinary
neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin predicts kidney outcome and
death in patients with cirrhosis and bacterial infections. J Hepatol
2014;61:35–42
.
[333] Ariza X, Sola E, Elia C, Barreto R, Moreira R, Morales-Ruiz M, et al.
Analysis of a urinary biomarker panel for clinical outcomes assessment
in cirrhosis. PLoS One 2015;10:e0128145
.
[334] Puthumana J, Ariza X, Belcher JM, Graupera I, Ginès P, Parikh CR. Urine
interleukin 18 and lipocalin 2 are biomarkers of acute tubular necrosis
in patients with cirrhosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;15:1003–1013
.
[335] Huelin P, Elia C, Solà E, Solé C, Moreira R, Carol M. New diagnostic
algorithm of acute kidney injury in cirrhosis that includes categoriza-
tion of stage 1 and assessment of urine NGAL. Relevance for the
differential diagnosis and clinical outcomes. J Hepatol 2017;66:S11
.
[336] Chawla LS, Eggers PW, Star RA, Kimmel PL. Acute kidney injury and
chronic kidney disease as interconnected syndromes. N Engl J Med
2014;371:58–66.
[337] Trawale JM, Paradis V, Rautou PE, Francoz C, Escolano S, Sallee M, et al.
The spectrum of renal lesions in patients with cirrhosis: a clinico-
pathological study. Liver Int 2010;30:725–732
.
[338] Wadei HM, Geiger XJ, Cortese C, Mai ML, Kramer DJ, Rosser BG, et al.
Kidney allocation to liver transplant candidates with renal failure of
undetermined etiology: role of percutaneous renal biopsy. Am J
Transplant 2008;8:2618–2626
.
[339] Wong F, Nadim MK, Kellum JA, Salerno F, Bellomo R, Gerbes A, et al.
Working Party proposal for a revised classiﬁcation system of renal
dysfunction in patients with cirrhosis. Gut 2011;60:702–709
.
[340] Stadlbauer V, Wright GA, Banaji M, Mukhopadhya A, Mookerjee RP,
Moore K, et al. Relationship between activation of the sympathetic
nervous system and renal blood ﬂow autoregulation in cirrhosis.
Gastroenterology 2008;134:111–119
.
[341] Wiest R, Lawson M, Geuking M. Pathological bacterial translocation in
liver cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2014;60:197–209
.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 49
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[342] Albillos A, de la Hera A, Gonzalez M, Moya JL, Calleja JL, Monserrat J,
et al. Increased lipopolysaccharide binding protein in cirrhotic patients
with marked immune and hemodynamic derangement. Hepatology
2003;37:208–217
.
[343] Navasa M, Follo A, Filella X, Jimenez W, Francitorra A, Planas R, et al.
Tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-6 in spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis in cirrhosis: relationship with the development of renal
impairment and mortality. Hepatology 1998;27:1227–1232
.
[344] Shah N, Dhar D, El Zahraa Mohammed F, Habtesion A, Davies NA,
Jover-Cobos M, et al. Prevention of acute kidney injury in a rodent
model of cirrhosis following selective gut decontamination is asso-
ciated with reduced renal TLR4 expression. J Hepatol 2012;56:
1047–1053
.
[345] Shah N, Mohamed FE, Jover-Cobos M, Macnaughtan J, Davies N, Moreau
R, et al. Increased renal expression and urinary excretion of TLR4 in
acute kidney injury associated with cirrhosis. Liver Int 2013;33:
398–409
.
[346] Alobaidi R, Basu RK, Goldstein SL, Bagshaw SM. Sepsis-associated acute
kidney injury. Semin Nephrol 2015;35:2–11
.
[347] Emlet DR, Shaw AD, Kellum JA. Sepsis-associated AKI: epithelial cell
dysfunction. Semin Nephrol 2015;35:85–95 .
[348] Prowle JR, Bellomo R. Sepsis-associated acute kidney injury: macrohe-
modynamic and microhemodynamic alterations in the renal circula-
tion. Semin Nephrol 2015;35:64–74
.
[349] de Seigneux S, Martin PY. Preventing the progression of AKI to CKD: the
role of mitochondria. J Am Soc Nephrol 2017;28:1327–1329 .
[350] Bairaktari E, Liamis G, Tsolas O, Elisaf M. Partially reversible renal
tubular damage in patients with obstructive jaundice. Hepatology
2001;33:1365–1369
.
[351] van Slambrouck CM, Salem F, Meehan SM, Chang A. Bile cast
nephropathy is a common pathologic ﬁnding fo kidney injury associ-
ated with severe liver dysfunction. Kidney Int 2013;84:192–197
.
[352] Durand F, Graupera I, Gines P, Olson JC, Nadim MK. Pathogenesis of
hepatorenal syndrome: implications for therapy. Am J Kidney Dis
2016;67:318–328
.
[353] Moreau R, Durand F, Poynard T, Duhamel C, Cervoni JP, Ichai P, et al.
Terlipressin in patients with cirrhosis and type 1 hepatorenal syn-
drome: a retrospective multicenter study. Gastroenterology 2002;122:
923–930
.
[354] Ortega R, Gines P, Uriz J, et al. Terlipressin therapy with and without
albumin for patients with hepatorenal syndrome: results of a prospec-
tive, nonrandomized study. Hepatology 2002;36:941–948
.
[355] Sanyal AJ, Boyer T, Garcia-Tsao G, Regenstein F, Rossaro L, Appenrodt B,
et al. A randomized prospective double blind, placebo controlled study
of terlipressin for type 1 hepatorenal syndrome. Gastroenterology
2008;134:1360–1368
.
[356] Martin-Llahi M, Pepin MN, Guevara M, Diaz F, Torre A, Monescillo A,
et al. Terlipressin and albumin vs albumin in patients with cirrhosis
and hepatorenal syndrome: a randomized study. Gastroenterology
2008;134:1352–1359
.
[357] Boyer TD, Sanyal AJ, Wong F, Frederick RT, Lake JR, O’Leary JG, et al.
REVERSE study investigators terlipressin plus albumin is more effective
than albumin alone in improving renal function in patients with
cirrhosis and hepatorenal syndrome type 1. Gastroenterology
2016;150:1579–1589
.
[358] Rodriguez E, Elia C, Sola E, Barreto R, Graupera I, Andrealli A, et al.
Terlipressin and albumin for type-1 hepatorenal syndrome associated
with sepsis. J Hepatol 2014;60:955–961
.
[359] Cavallin M, Kamath PS, Merli M, Fasolato S, Toniutto P, Salerno F, et al.
Terlipressin plus albumin vs. midodrine and octreotide plus albumin in
the treatment of hepatorenal syndrome: A randomized trial. Hepatol-
ogy 2015;62:567–574
.
[360] Cavallin M, Piano S, Romano A, Fasolato S, Frigo AC, Benetti G, et al.
Terlipressin given by continuous intravenous infusion vs. intravenous
boluses in the treatment of hepatorenal syndrome: A randomized
controlled study. Hepatology 2016;63:983–992
.
[361] Gluud LL, Christensen K, Christensen E, Krag A. Terlipressin for
hepatorenal syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012:CD005162
.
[362] Facciorusso A, Chandar AK, Murad MH, Prokop LJ, Muscatiello N,
Kamath PS. Singh SComparative efﬁcacy of pharmacological strategies
for management of type 1 hepatorenal syndrome: a systematic review
and network meta-analysis. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol
2017;2:94–102
.
[363] Narahara Y, Kanazawa H, Taki Y, Kimura Y, Atsukawa M, Katakura T,
et al. Effects of terlipressin on systemic, hepatic and renal hemody-
namics in patients with cirrhosis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009;24:
1791–1797
.
[364] Garcia-Martinez R, Caraceni P, Bernardi M, Gines P, Arroyo V, Jalan R.
Albumin: pathophysiologic basis of its role in the treatment of cirrhosis
and its complications. Hepatology 2013;58:1836–1846
.
[365] Gerbes AL, Huber E, Gulberg V. Terlipressin for hepatorenal syndrome:
continuous infusion as an alternative to i.v. bolus administration.
Gastroenterology 2009;137:1179–1181 .
[366] Piano S, Morando F, Fasolato S, Cavallin M, Boscato N, Boccagni P, et al.
Continuous recurrence of type 1 hepatorenal syndrome and long-term
treatment with terlipressin and albumin: a new exception to MELD
score in the allocation system to liver transplantation? J Hepatol
2011;55:491–496
.
[367] Gow PJ, Ardalan ZS, Vasudevan A, Testro AG, Ye B, Angus PW.
Outpatient terlipressin infusion for the treatment of refractory ascites.
Am J Gastroenterol 2016;111:1041–1042
.
[368] Alessandria C, Ottobrelli A, Debernardi-Venon W, Todros L, Cerenzia
MT, Martini S, et al. Noradrenalin vs terlipressin in patients with
hepatorenal syndrome: a prospective, randomized, unblinded, pilot
study. J Hepatol 2007;47:499–505
.
[369] Duvoux C, Zanditenas D, Hezode C, Chauvat A, Monin JL, Roudot-
Thoraval F, et al. Effects of noradrenalin and albumin in patients with
type I hepatorenal syndrome: a pilot study. Hepatology 2002;36:374–380
.
[370] Singh V, Ghosh S, Singh B, Kumar P, Sharma N, Bhalla A, et al.
Noradrenaline vs. terlipressin in the treatment of hepatorenal syn-
drome: a randomized study. J Hepatol 2012;56:1293–1298
.
[371] Sharma P, Kumar A, Shrama BC, Sarin SK. An open label, pilot,
randomized controlled trial of noradrenaline vs. terlipressin in the
treatment of type 1 hepatorenal syndrome and predictors of response.
Am J Gastroenterol 2008;103:1689–1697
.
[372] Esrailian E, Pantangco ER, Kyulo NL, Hu KQ, Runyon BA. Octreotide/
Midodrine therapy signiﬁcantly improves renal function and 30-day
survival in patients with type 1 hepatorenal syndrome. Dig Dis Sci
2007;52:742–748
.
[373] Restuccia T, Ortega R, Guevara M, Gines P, Alessandria C, Ozdogan O,
et al. Effects of treatment of hepatorenal syndrome before transplan-
tation on posttransplantation outcome. A case-control study. J Hepatol
2004;40:140–146
.
[374] Rodriguez E, Henrique Pereira G, Sola E, Elia C, Barreto R, Pose E, et al.
Treatment of type 2 hepatorenal syndrome in patients awaiting
transplantation: Effects on kidney function and transplantation out-
comes. Liver Transpl 2015;21:1347–1354
.
[375] Boyer TD, Sanyal AJ, Garcia-Tsao G, Blei A, Carl D, Bexon AS, et al.
Predictors of response to terliupressin plus albumin in hepatorenal
syndrome (HRS) type 1: relationship of serum creatinine to hemody-
namics. J Hepatol 2011;55:315–321
.
[376] Piano S, Schmidt HH, Ariza X, Amoros A, Romano A, Solà E, et al. Impact
of Acute-on-Chronic Liver Failure on response to treatment with
terlipressin and albumin in patients with type 1 hepatorenal syndrome.
J Hepatol 2017;66:S572
.
[377] Nazar A, Pereira GH, Guevara M, Martín-Llahi M, Pepin MN, Marinelli
M, et al. Predictors of response to therapy with terlipressin and
albumin in patients with cirrhosis and type 1 hepatorenal syndrome.
Hepatology 2010;51:219–226
.
[378] Brensing KA, Textor J, Perz J, Schiedermaier P, Raab P, Strunk H, et al.
Long term outcome after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent-
shunt in non-transplant cirrhotics with hepatorenal syndrome: a phase
II study. Gut 2000;47:288–295
.
[379] Guevara M, Gines P, Bandi JC, Gilabert R, Sort P, Jimenez W, et al.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt in hepatorenal syn-
drome: effects on renal function and vasoactive systems. Hepatology
1998;28:416–422
.
[380] Testino G, Ferro C, Sumberaz A, Messa P, Morelli N, Guadagni B, et al.
Type-2 hepatorenal syndrome and refractory ascites: role of transjugu-
lar intrahepatic portosystemic stent-shunt in eighteen patients with
advanced cirrhosis awaiting orthotopic liver transplantation. Hepato-
gastroenterology 2003;50:1753–1755
.
[381] Keller F, Heinze H, Jochimsen F, Passfall J, Schuppan D, Buttner P. Risk
factors and outcome of 107 patients with decompensated liver disease
and acute renal failure (including 26 patients with hepatorenal
syndrome): the role of hemodialysis. Ren Fail 1995;17:135–146
.
[382] Sourianarayanane A, Raina R, Garg G, McCullough AJ, O’Shea RS.
Management and outcome in hepatorenal syndrome: need for renal
replacement therapy in non-transplanted patients. Int Urol Nephrol
2014;46:793–800
.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
50 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[383] Staufer K, Roedl K, Kivaranovic D, Drolz A, Horvatits T, Rasoul-
Rockenschaub S, et al. Renal replacement therapy in critically ill liver
cirrhotic patients-outcome and clinical implications. Liver Int
2017;37:843–850
.
[384] Wu VC, Ko WJ, Chang HW, Chen YS, Chen YW, Chen YM, et al. Early
renal replacement therapy in patients with postoperative acute liver
failure associated with acute renal failure: effect on postoperative
outcomes. J Am Coll Surg 2007;205:266–276
.
[385] Gaudry S, Hajage D, Schortgen F, Martin-Lefevre L, Pons B, Boulet E,
et al. Initiation strategies for renal-replacement therapy in the inten-
sive care unit. N Engl J Med 2016;375:122–133
.
[386] Zarbock A, Kellum JA, Schmidt C, Van Aken H, Wempe C, Pavenstadt
H, et al. Effect of early vs delayed initiation of renal replacement
therapy on mortality in critically ill patients with acute kidney
injury: the elain randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016;315:
2190–2199
.
[387] Wong LP, Blackley MP, Andreoni KA, Chin H, Falk RJ, Klemmer PJ.
Survival of liver transplant candidates with acute renal failure receiving
renal replacement therapy. Kidney Int 2005;68:362–370
.
[388] Banares R, Nevens F, Larsen FS, Jalan R, Albillos A, Dollinger M, et al.
Extracorporeal albumin dialysis with the molecular adsorbent recircu-
lating system in acute-on-chronic liver failure: the RELIEF trial.
Hepatology 2013;57:1153–1162
.
[389] Kribben A, Gerken G, Haag S, Herget-Rosenthal S, Treichel U, Betz C,
et al. Effects of fractionated plasma separation and adsorption on
survival in patients with acute-on-chronic liver failure. Gastroenterol-
ogy 2012;142:782–789
.
[390] Boyer TD, Sanyal AJ, Garcia-Tsao G, Regenstein F, Rossaro L, Appenrodt
B, et al. Impact of liver transplantation on the survival of patients
treated for hepatorenal syndrome type 1. Liver Transpl 2011;17:
1328–1332
.
[391] Gonwa TA, Klintmalm GB, Levy M, Jennings LS, Goldstein RM, Husberg
BS. Impact of pretransplant renal function on survival after liver
transplantation. Transplantation 1995;59:361–365 .
[392] Nadim MK, Sung RS, Davis CL, Andreoni KA, Biggins SW, Danovitch GM,
et al. Simultaneous liver-kidney transplantation summit: current state
and future directions. Am J Transplant 2012;12:2901–2908
.
[393] Francoz C, Nadim MK, Durand F. Kidney biomarkers in cirrhosis. J
Hepatol 2016;65:809–824 .
[394] Angeli P, Gines P. Hepatorenal syndrome, MELD score and liver
transplantation: an evolving issue with relevant implications for
clinical practice. J Hepatol 2012;57:1135–1140
.
[395] Cillo U, Burra P, Mazzaferro V, Belli L, Pinna AD, Spada M, et al. A
multistep, consensus-based approach to organ allocation in liver
transplantation: toward a ‘‘blended principle model”. Am J Transplant
2015;1:2552–2561
.
[396] Akriviadis E, Botla R, Briggs W, Han S, Reynolds T, Shakil O. Pentox-
ifylline improves short-term survival in severe acute alcoholic hepati-
tis: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Gastroenterology
2000;119:1637–1648
.
[397] Mathurin P, Louvet A, Duhamel A, Nahon P, Carbonell N, Boursier J,
et al. Prednisolone with vs without pentoxifylline and survival of
patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 2013;310:1033–1041
.
[398] Parker R, Armstrong MJ, Corbett C, Rowe IA, Houlihan DD. Systematic
review: pentoxifylline for the treatment of severe alcoholic hepatitis.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013;37:845–854
.
[399] Allen AM, Kim WR. Epidemiology and healthcare burden of acute-on-
chronic liver failure. Semin Liver Dis 2016;36:123–126 .
[400] Piano S, Tonon M, Vettore E, Stanco M, Pilutti C, Romano A, et al.
Incidence, predictors and outcomes of acute-on-chronic liver failure in
outpatients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2017;67:1177–1184
.
[401] Arroyo V, Jalan R. Acute-on-chronic liver failure: deﬁnition, diagnosis,
and clinical characteristics. Semin Liver Dis 2016;36:109–116
.
[402] Sarin SK, Kedarisetty CK, Abbas Z, Amarapurkar D, Bihari C, Chan AC,
et al. Acute-on-chronic liver failure: consensus recommendations of the
Asian Paciﬁc Association for the Study of the Liver (APASL) 2014.
Hepatol Int 2014;8:453–471
.
[403] Jalan R, Yurdaydin C, Bajaj JS, Acharya SK, Arroyo V, Lin HC, et al.
Toward an improved deﬁnition of acute on chronic liver failure.
Gastroenterology 2014;147:4–10
.
[404] Bajaj JS. Deﬁning acute-on-chronic liver failure: will East and West ever
meet? Gastroenterology 2013;144:1337–1339 .
[405] Kim TY, Song DS, Kim HY, Sinn DH, Yoon EL, Kim CW, et al.
Characteristics and discrepancies in acute-on-chronic liver failure:
need for a uniﬁed deﬁnition. PLoS One 2016;11:e0146745
.
[406] Arroyo V, Moreau R, Jalan R, Gines P. Acute-on-chronic liver failure: A
new syndrome that will re-classify cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2015;62:
S131–S143
.
[407] Jalan R, Pavesi M, Saliba F, Amoros A, Fernandez J, Holland-Fischer P,
et al. The CLIF Consortium Acute Decompensation score (CLIF-C ADs)
for prognosis of hospitalised cirrhotic patients without acute-on-
chronic liver failure. J Hepatol 2015;62:831–840
.
[408] Arroyo V, Moreau R, Kamath PS, Jalan R, Gines P, Nevens F, et al. Acute-
on-chronic liver failure in cirrhosis. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2016;2:16041
.
[409] Trebicka J. Predisposing factors in acute-on-chronic liver failure. Semin
Liver Dis 2016;36:167–173
.
[410] Sarin SK, Choudhury A. Acute-on-chronic liver failure. Curr Gastroen-
terol Rep 2016;18:61 .
[411] Bajaj JS, O’Leary JG, Reddy KR, Wong F, Biggins SW, Patton H, et al.
Survival in infection-related acute-on-chronic liver failure is deﬁned by
extrahepatic organ failures. Hepatology 2014;60:250–256
.
[412] Silva PE, Fayad L, Lazzarotto C, Ronsoni MF, Bazzo ML, Colombo BS,
et al. Single-centre validation of the EASL-CLIF consortium deﬁnition of
acute-on-chronic liver failure and CLIF-SOFA for prediction of mortality
in cirrhosis. Liver Int 2015;35:1516–1523
.
[413] Li H, Chen LY, Zhang NN, Li ST, Zeng B, Pavesi M, et al. Characteristics,
diagnosis and prognosis of acute-on-chronic liver failure in cirrhosis
associated to hepatitis B. Sci Rep 2016;6:25487
.
[414] Shalimar, Saraswat V, Singh SP, Duseja A, Shukla A, Eapen CE, et al.
Acute-on-chronic liver failure in India: The Indian National Association
for Study of the Liver consortium experience. J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2016;31:1742–1749
.
[415] Shi Y, Yang Y, Hu Y, Wu W, Yang Q, Zheng M, et al. Acute-on-chronic
liver failure precipitated by hepatic injury is distinct from that
precipitated by extrahepatic insults. Hepatology 2015;62:232–242
.
[416] Shalimar, Kumar D, Vadiraja PK, Nayak B, Thakur B, Das P, et al. Acute
on chronic liver failure because of acute hepatic insults: Etiologies,
course, extrahepatic organ failure and predictors of mortality. J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;31:856–864
.
[417] Dhiman RK, Agrawal S, Gupta T, Duseja A, Chawla Y. Chronic liver
failure-sequential organ failure assessment is better than the asia-
paciﬁc association for the study of Liver criteria for deﬁning acute-on-
chronic liver failure and predicting outcome. World J Gastroenterol
2014;20:14934–14941
.
[418] Pischke S, Suneetha PV, Baechlein C, Barg-Hock H, Heim A, Kamar N,
et al. Hepatitis E virus infection as a cause of graft hepatitis in liver
transplant recipients. Liver Transpl 2010;16:74–82
.
[419] Jalan R, Saliba F, Pavesi M, Amoros A, Moreau R, Gines P, et al.
Development and validation of a prognostic score to predict mortality
in patients with acute-on-chronic liver failure. J Hepatol 2014;61:
1038–1047
.
[420] McPhail MJ, Shawcross DL, Abeles RD, Chang A, Patel V, Lee GH, et al.
Increased survival for patients with cirrhosis and organ failure in liver
intensive care and validation of the chronic liver failure-sequential
organ failure scoring system. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:
1353–1360
.
[421] Lee M, Lee JH, Oh S, Jang Y, Lee W, Lee HJ, et al. CLIF-SOFA scoring
system accurately predicts short-term mortality in acutely decompen-
sated patients with alcoholic cirrhosis: a retrospective analysis. Liver
Int 2015;35:46–57
.
[422] O’Leary JG, Reddy KR, Garcia-Tsao G, Biggins SW, Wong F, Fallon MB,
et al. NACSELD acute-on-chronic liver failure (NACSELD-ACLF) score
predicts 30-day survival in hospitalized patients with cirrhosis. Hepa-
tology 2018
.
[423] Choudhury A, Jindal A, Maiwall R, Sharma MK, Sharma BC, Pamecha V,
et al. APASL ACLF Working PartyLiver failure determines the outcome
in patients of acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF): comparison of
APASL ACLF research consortium (AARC) and CLIF-SOFA models.
Hepatol Int 2017;11:461–471
.
[424] Hernaez R, Sola E, Moreau R, Gines P. Acute-on-chronic liver failure: an
update. Gut 2017;66:541–553 .
[425] Gustot T, Fernandez J, Garcia E, Morando F, Caraceni P, Alessandria C,
et al. Clinical Course of acute-on-chronic liver failure syndrome and
effects on prognosis. Hepatology 2015;62:243–252
.
[426] Garg H, Sarin SK, Kumar M, Garg V, Sharma BC, Kumar A. Tenofovir
improves the outcome in patients with spontaneous reactivation of
hepatitis B presenting as acute-on-chronic liver failure. Hepatology
2011;53:774–780
.
[427] Lin B, Pan CQ, Xie D, Xie J, Xie S, Zhang X, et al. Entecavir improves the
outcome of acute-on-chronic liver failure due to the acute exacerbation
of chronic hepatitis B. Hepatol Int 2013;7:460–467
.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 51
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[428] Zhang Y, Hu XY, Zhong S, Yang F, Zhou TY, Chen G, et al. Entecavir vs
lamivudine therapy for naive patients with spontaneous reactivation of
hepatitis B presenting as acute-on-chronic liver failure. World J
Gastroenterol. 2014;20:4745–4752
.
[429] Xiang-Hui Y, Lang X, Yan Z, Li Z, Xiao-Feng S, Hong R. Prediction of
prognosis to lamivudine in patients with spontaneous reactivation of
hepatitis B virus-related acute-on-chronic liver failure: using virologic
response at week 4. Eur J Intern Med 2014;25:860–864
.
[430] Chen JF, Wang KW, Zhang SQ, Lei ZY, Xie JQ, Zhu JY, et al. Dexametha-
sone in outcome of patients with hepatitis B virus-related acute-on-
chronic liver failure. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;29:800–806
.
[431] Guo YM, Li FY, Gong M, Zhang L, Wang JB, Xiao XH, et al. Short-term
efﬁcacy of treating hepatitis B virus-related acute-on-chronic liver
failure based on cold pattern differentiation with hot herbs: A
randomized controlled trial. Chin J Integr Med 2016;22:573–580
.
[432] Garg V, Garg H, Khan A, Trehanpati N, Kumar A, Sharma BC, et al.
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor mobilizes CD34(+) cells and
improves survival of patients with acute-on-chronic liver failure.
Gastroenterology 2012;142:505–512
.
[433] Finkenstedt A, Nachbaur K, Zoller H, Joannidis M, Pratschke J, Graziadei
IW, et al. Acute-on-chronic liver failure: excellent outcomes after liver
transplantation but high mortality on the wait list. Liver Transpl
2013;19:879–886
.
[434] Artru F, Louvet A, Ruiz I, Levesque E, Labreuche J, Ursic-Bedoya J, et al.
Liver transplantation in the most severely ill cirrhotic patients: A
multicenter study in acute-on-chronic liver failure grade 3. J Hepatol
2017;67:708–715
.
[435] Bouachour G, Tirot P, Gouello JP, Mathieu E, Vincent JF, Alquier P.
Adrenocortical function during septic shock. Intensive Care Med
1995;21:57–62
.
[436] Marik PE, Pastores SM, Annane D, Meduri GU, Sprung CL, Arlt W, et al.
Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of corticosteroid
insufﬁciency in critically ill adult patients: consensus statements from
an international task force by the American College of Critical Care
Medicine. Crit Care Med 2008;36:1937–1949
.
[437] Tsai MH, Peng YS, Chen YC, Liu NJ, Ho YP, Fang JT, et al. Adrenal
insufﬁciency in patients with cirrhosis, severe sepsis and septic shock.
Hepatology 2006;43:673–681
.
[438] Acevedo J, Fernandez J, Prado V, Silva A, Castro M, Pavesi M, et al.
Relative adrenal insufﬁciency in decompensated cirrhosis: Relationship
to short-term risk of severe sepsis, hepatorenal syndrome, and death.
Hepatology 2013;58:1757–1765
.
[439] Jang JY, Kim TY, Sohn JH, Lee TH, Jeong SW, Park EJ, et al. Relative
adrenal insufﬁciency in chronic liver disease: its prevalence and effects
on long-term mortality. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2014;40:819–826
.
[440] Tsai MH, Huang HC, Peng YS, Chen YC, Tian YC, Yang CW, et al. Critical
illness-related corticosteroid insufﬁciency in cirrhotic patients with
acute gastroesophageal variceal bleeding: risk factors and association
with outcome. Crit Care Med 2014;42:2546–2555
.
[441] Fede G, Spadaro L, Tomaselli T, Privitera G, Scicali R, Vasianopoulou P,
et al. Comparison of total cortisol, free cortisol, and surrogate markers
of free cortisol in diagnosis of adrenal insufﬁciency in patients with
stable cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;12:504–512
.
[442] Kim G, Huh JH, Lee KJ, Kim MY, Shim KY, Baik SK. Relative adrenal
insufﬁciency in patients with cirrhosis: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Dig Dis Sci 2017;62:1067–1079
.
[443] Fede G, Spadaro L, Tomaselli T, Privitera G, Germani G, Tsochatzis E,
et al. Adrenocortical dysfunction in liver disease: a systematic review.
Hepatology 2012;55:1282–1291
.
[444] McNeilly AD, Macfarlane DP, O’Flaherty E, Livingstone DE, Mitic T,
McConnell KM, et al. Bile acids modulate glucocorticoid metabolism
and the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis in obstructive jaundice. J
Hepatol 2010;52:705–711
.
[445] Worlicek M, Knebel K, Linde HJ, Moleda L, Scholmerich J, Straub RH,
et al. Splanchnic sympathectomy prevents translocation and
spreading of E coli but not S aureus in liver cirrhosis. Gut 2010;59:
1127–1134
.
[446] Cholongitas E, Goulis I, Pagkalidou E, Haidich AB, Karagiannis AKA,
Nakouti T, et al. Relative adrenal insufﬁciency is associated with the
clinical outcome in patients with stable decompensated cirrhosis. Ann
Hepatol 2017;16:584–590
.
[447] Trifan A, Chiriac S, Stanciu C. Update on adrenal insufﬁciency in
patients with liver cirrhosis. World J Gastroenterol 2013;19:445–456 .
[448] Galbois A, Rudler M, Massard J, Fulla Y, Bennani A, Bonnefont-Rousselot
D, et al. Assessment of adrenal function in cirrhotic patients: salivary
cortisol should be preferred. J Hepatol 2010;52:839–845
.
[449] Hamrahian AH, Oseni TS, Arafah BM. Measurements of serum-free
cortisol in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2004;350:1629–1638 .
[450] Tan T, Chang L, Woodward A, McWhinney B, Galligan J, Macdonald GA,
et al. Characterising adrenal function using directly measured plasma
free cortisol in stable severe liver disease. J Hepatol 2010;53:841–848
.
[451] Coolens JL, Van Baelen H, Heyns W. Clinical use of unbound plasma
cortisol as calculated from total cortisol and corticosteroid-binding
globulin. J Steroid Biochem 1987;26:197–202 .
[452] le Roux CW, Sivakumaran S, Alaghband-Zadeh J, Dhillo W, Kong WM,
Wheeler MJ. Free cortisol index as a surrogate marker for serum free
cortisol. Ann Clin Biochem 2002;39:406–408
.
[453] Arafah BM, Nishiyama FJ, Tlaygeh H, Hejal R. Measurement of salivary
cortisol concentration in the assessment of adrenal function in critically
ill subjects: a surrogate marker of the circulating free cortisol. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:2965–2971
.
[454] Thevenot T, Borot S, Remy-Martin A, Sapin R, Cervoni JP, Richou C, et al.
Assessment of adrenal function in cirrhotic patients using concentra-
tion of serum-free and salivary cortisol. Liver Int 2011;31:425–433
.
[455] Fernandez J, Escorsell A, Zabalza M, Felipe V, Navasa M, Mas A, et al.
Adrenal insufﬁciency in patients with cirrhosis and septic shock: Effect
of treatment with hydrocortisone on survival. Hepatology 2006;44:
1288–1295
.
[456] Arabi YM, Aljumah A, Dabbagh O, Tamim HM, Rishu AH, Al-Abdulka-
reem A, et al. Low-dose hydrocortisone in patients with cirrhosis and
septic shock: a randomized controlled trial. CMAJ 2010;182:
1971–1977
.
[457] Moller S, Henriksen JH. Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy: a pathophysiological
review of circulatory dysfunction in liver disease. Heart 2002;87:9–15
.
[458] Hunter JD, Doddi M. Sepsis and the heart. Br J Anaesth 2010;104:3–11 .
[459] Mehta G, Gustot T, Mookerjee RP, Garcia-Pagan JC, Fallon MB, Shah VH,
et al. Inﬂammation and portal hypertension - the undiscovered
country. J Hepatol 2014;61:155–163
.
[460] De BK, Majumdar D, Das D, Biswas PK, Mandal SK, Ray S, et al. Cardiac
dysfunction in portal hypertension among patients with cirrhosis and
non-cirrhotic portal ﬁbrosis. J Hepatol 2003;39:315–319
.
[461] Karagiannakis DS, Vlachogiannakos J, Anastasiadis G, Vaﬁadis-Zoubou-
lis I, Ladas SD. Diastolic cardiac dysfunction is a predictor of dismal
prognosis in patients with liver cirrhosis. Hepatol Int 2014;8:588–594
.
[462] Rabie RN, Cazzaniga M, Salerno F, Wong F. The use of E/A ratio as a
predictor of outcome in cirrhotic patients treated with transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104:
2458–2466
.
[463] Grose RD, Nolan J, Dillon JF, Errington M, Hannan WJ, Bouchier IA, et al.
Exercise-induced left ventricular dysfunction in alcoholic and non-
alcoholic cirrhosis. J Hepatol 1995;22:326–332
.
[464] Wong F, Girgrah N, Graba J, Allidina Y, Liu P, Blendis L. The cardiac
response to exercise in cirrhosis. Gut 2001;49:268–275 .
[465] Bernardi M, Rubboli A, Trevisani F, Cancellieri C, Ligabue A, Baraldini M,
et al. Reduced cardiovascular responsiveness to exercise-induced
sympathoadrenergic stimulation in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol
1991;12:207–216
.
[466] Kim MY, Baik SK, Won CS, Park HJ, Jeon HK, Hong HI, et al. Dobutamine
stress echocardiography for evaluating cirrhotic cardiomyopathy in
liver cirrhosis. Korean J Hepatol 2010;16:376–382
.
[467] Krag A, Bendtsen F, Dahl EK, Kjaer A, Petersen CL, Moller S. Cardiac
function in patients with early cirrhosis during maximal beta-adren-
ergic drive: a dobutamine stress study. PLoS One 2014;9:e109179
.
[468] Stanton T, Leano R, Marwick TH. Prediction of all-cause mortality from
global longitudinal speckle strain: comparison with ejection fraction
and wall motion scoring. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2009;2:356–364 .
[469] Lang RM, Bierig M, Devereux RB, Flachskampf FA, Foster E, Pellikka PA,
et al. Recommendations for chamber quantiﬁcation: a report from the
American Society of Echocardiography’s Guidelines and Standards
Committee and the Chamber Quantiﬁcation Writing Group, developed
in conjunction with the European Association of Echocardiography, a
branch of the European Society of Cardiology. J Am Soc Echocardiogr
2005;18:1440–1463
.
[470] Stampehl MR, Mann DL, Nguyen JS, Cota F, Colmenares C, Dokainish H.
Speckle strain echocardiography predicts outcome in patients with
heart failure with both depressed and preserved left ventricular
ejection fraction. Echocardiography 2015;32:71–78
.
[471] Chen Y, Chan AC, Chan SC, Chok SH, Sharr W, Fung J, et al. A detailed
evaluation of cardiac function in cirrhotic patients and its alteration
with or without liver transplantation. J Cardiol 2016;67:140–146
.
[472] Sampaio F, Pimenta J, Bettencourt N, Fontes-Carvalho R, Silva AP,
Valente J, et al. Systolic and diastolic dysfunction in cirrhosis: a tissue-
Clinical Practice Guidelines
52 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

Doppler and speckle tracking echocardiography study. Liver Int
2013;33:1158–1165.
[473] Nazar A, Guevara M, Sitges M, Terra C, Sola E, Guigou C, et al. LEFT
ventricular function assessed by echocardiography in cirrhosis: rela-
tionship to systemic hemodynamics and renal dysfunction. J Hepatol
2013;58:51–57
.
[474] Cesari M, Fasolato S, Rosi S, Angeli P. Cardiac dysfunction in patients
with cirrhosis: is the systolic component its main feature? Eur J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;27:660–666
.
[475] Nagueh SF, Smiseth OA, Appleton CP, Byrd 3rd BF, Dokainish H,
Edvardsen T, et al. Recommendations for the evaluation of left
ventricular diastolic function by echocardiography: an update from
the American society of echocardiography and the european associa-
tion of cardiovascular imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging
2016;17:1321–1360
.
[476] Takemoto Y, Barnes ME, Seward JB, Lester SJ, Appleton CA, Gersh BJ,
et al. Usefulness of left atrial volume in predicting ﬁrst congestive heart
failure in patients > or = 65 years of age with well-preserved left
ventricular systolic function. Am J Cardiol 2005;96:832–836
.
[477] Valeriano V, Funaro S, Lionetti R, Riggio O, Pulcinelli G, Fiore P, et al.
Modiﬁcation of cardiac function in cirrhotic patients with and without
ascites. Am J Gastroenterol 2000;95:3200–3205
.
[478] Pozzi M, Carugo S, Boari G, Pecci V, de Ceglia S, Maggiolini S, et al.
Evidence of functional and structural cardiac abnormalities in
cirrhotic patients with and without ascites. Hepatology 1997;26:
1131–1137
.
[479] Cazzaniga M, Salerno F, Pagnozzi G, Dionigi E, Visentin S, Cirello I, et al.
Diastolic dysfunction is associated with poor survival in patients with
cirrhosis with transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. Gut
2007;56:869–875
.
[480] Ruiz-del-Arbol L, Achecar L, Serradilla R, Rodriguez-Gandia MA, Rivero
M, Garrido E, et al. Diastolic dysfunction is a predictor of poor outcomes
in patients with cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and a normal creatinine.
Hepatology 2013;58:1732–1741
.
[481] Cesari M, Frigo AC, Tonon M, Angeli P. Cardiovascular predictors of
death in patients with cirrhosis. Hepatology 2017
.
[482] Merli M, Torromeo C, Giusto M, Iacovone G, Riggio O, Puddu PE.
Survival at 2 years among liver cirrhotic patients is inﬂuenced by left
atrial volume and left ventricular mass. Liver Int 2017;37:700–706
.
[483] Kozor R, Nordin S, Treibel TA, Rosmini S, Castelletti S, Fontana M, et al.
Insight into hypertrophied hearts: a cardiovascular magnetic resonance
study of papillary muscle mass and T1 mapping. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging 2016;18:1034–1040
.
[484] Ngu PJ, Butler M, Pham A, Roberts SK, Taylor AJ. Cardiac remodelling
identiﬁed by cardiovascular magnetic resonance in patients with
hepatitis C infection and liver disease. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging
2016;32:629–636
.
[485] Ruiz-del-Arbol L, Monescillo A, Arocena C, Valer P, Gines P, Moreira V,
et al. Circulatory function and hepatorenal syndrome in cirrhosis.
Hepatology 2005;42:439–447
.
[486] Zhang W, Xu X, Kao R, Mele T, Kvietys P, Martin CM, et al. Cardiac
ﬁbroblasts contribute to myocardial dysfunction in mice with sepsis:
the role of NLRP3 inﬂammasome activation. PLoS One 2014;9:e107639 .
[487] Gaskari SA, Liu H, D’Mello C, Kunos G, Lee SS. Blunted cardiac response
to hemorrhage in cirrhotic rats is mediated by local macrophage-
released endocannabinoids. J Hepatol 2015;62:1272–1277
.
[488] Liu H, Lee SS. Nuclear factor-kappaB inhibition improves myocardial
contractility in rats with cirrhotic cardiomyopathy. Liver Int 2008;28:
640–648
.
[489] Trevisani F, Di Micoli A, Zambruni A, Biselli M, Santi V, Erroi V, et al. QT
interval prolongation by acute gastrointestinal bleeding in patients
with cirrhosis. Liver Int 2012;32:1510–1515
.
[490] Zhao J, Qi X, Hou F, Ning Z, Zhang X, Deng H, et al. Prevalence, risk
factors and in-hospital outcomes of QTc interval prolongation in liver
cirrhosis. Am J Med Sci 2016;352:285–295
.
[491] Krag A, Bendtsen F, Mortensen C, Henriksen JH, Moller S. Effects of a
single terlipressin administration on cardiac function and perfusion in
cirrhosis. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;22:1085–1092
.
[492] Wannhoff A, Hippchen T, Weiss CS, Friedrich K, Rupp C, Neumann-
Haefelin C, et al. Cardiac volume overload and pulmonary hypertension
in long-term follow-up of patients with a transjugular intrahepatic
portosystemic shunt. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2016;43:955–965
.
[493] Busk TM, Bendtsen F, Henriksen JH, Fuglsang S, Clemmesen JO, Larsen
FS, et al. Effects of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS)
on blood volume distribution in patients with cirrhosis. Dig Liver Dis
2017;49:1353–1359
.
[494] Raevens S, De Pauw M, Geerts A, Berrevoet F, Rogiers X, Troisi RI, et al.
Prevalence and outcome of diastolic dysfunction in liver transplanta-
tion recipients. Acta Cardiol 2014;69:273–280
.
[495] Saner FH, Neumann T, Canbay A, Treckmann JW, Hartmann M,
Goerlinger K, et al. High brain-natriuretic peptide level predicts
cirrhotic cardiomyopathy in liver transplant patients. Transpl Int
2011;24:425–432
.
[496] Sampaio F, Pimenta J, Bettencourt N, Fontes-Carvalho R, Silva AP,
Valente J, et al. Systolic dysfunction and diastolic dysfunction do not
inﬂuence medium-term prognosis in patients with cirrhosis. Eur J
Intern Med 2014;25:241–246
.
[497] Alexopoulou A, Papatheodoridis G, Pouriki S, Chrysohoou C, Raftopou-
los L, Stefanadis C, et al. Diastolic myocardial dysfunction does not
affect survival in patients with cirrhosis. Transpl Int 2012;25:
1174–1181
.
[498] Rodriguez-Roisin R, Krowka MJ, Herve P, Fallon MB. ERS task force
pulmonary-hepatic vascular disorders (PHD) scientiﬁc committee.
Pulmonary-hepatic vascular disorders (PHD). Eur Respir J 2004;24:
861–880
.
[499] Machicao VI, Balakrishnan M, Fallon MB. Pulmonary complications in
chronic liver disease. Hepatology 2014;59:1627–1637 .
[500] Kaymakoglu S, Kahraman T, Kudat H, Demir K, Cakaloglu Y, Adalet I,
et al. Hepatopulmonary syndrome in noncirrhotic portal hypertensive
patients. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:556–560
.
[501] Fuhrmann V, Madl C, Mueller C, Holzinger U, Kitzberger R, Funk GC,
et al. Hepatopulmonary syndrome in patients with hypoxic hepatitis.
Gastroenterology 2006;131:69–75 .
[502] Rodríguez-Roisin R, Agustí AG, Roca J. The hepatopulmonary syndrome:
new name, old complexities. Thorax 1992;47:897–902
.
[503] Fallon MB, Abrams GA. Pulmonary dysfunction in chronic liver disease.
Hepatology 2000;32:859–865
.
[504] Voiosu AM, Daha IC, Voiosu TA, Mateescu BR, Dan GA, Ba ˘icus/C223CR, et al.
Prevalence and impact on survival of hepatopulmonary syndrome and
cirrhotic cardiomyopathy in a cohort of cirrhotic patients. Liver Int
2015;35:2547–2555
.
[505] Rodríguez-Roisin R, Krowka MJ. Hepatopulmonary syndrome; a liver-
induced lung vascular disorder. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2378–2387
.
[506] Schenk P, Schoniger-Hekele M, Fuhrmann V, Madl C, Silberhumer G,
Muller C. Prognostic signiﬁcance of the hepatopulmonary syndrome in
patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2003;125:1042–1052 .
[507] Swanson KL, Wiesner RH, Krowka MJ. Natural history of hepatopul-
monary syndrome: impact of liver transplantation. Hepatology
2005;41:1122–1129
.
[508] Fallon MB, Krowka MJ, Brown RS, Trotter JF, Zacks S, Roberts KE, et al.
Impact of hepatopulmonary syndrome on quality of life and survival in
liver transplant candidates. Gastroenterology 2008;135:1168–1175
.
[509] Schraufnagel DE, Kay JM. Structural and pathologic changes in the lung
vasculature in chronic liver disease. Clin Chest Med 2006;17:1–15
.
[510] Boryczka G, Hartleb M, Rudzki K, Janik MA. Inﬂuence of an upright body
position on the size of intrapulmonary blood shunts in patients with
advanced liver cirrhosis. J Physiol Pharmacol 2015;66:855–861
.
[511] Fallon MB, Abrams GA, Luo B, Hou Z, Dai J, Ku DD. The role of
endothelial nitric oxide synthase in the pathogenesis of a rat model of
hepatopulmonary syndrome. Gastroenterology 1997;113:606–614
.
[512] Luo B, Liu L, Tang L, Zhang J, Ling Y, Fallon MB. ET-1 and TNF- alpha in
HPS: analysis in prehepatic portal hypertension and biliary and
nonbiliary cirrhosis in rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
2004;286:G294–G303
.
[513] Wiest R, Groszmann RJ. The paradox of nitric oxide in cirrhosis and
portal hypertension: too much, not enough. Hepatology 2002;35:
478–491
.
[514] Ling Y, Zhang J, Luo B, Song D, Liu L, Tang L, et al. The role of endothelin-
1 and the endothelin B receptor in the pathogenesis of hepatopul-
monary syndrome in the rat. Hepatology 2004;39:1593–1602
.
[515] Tang L, Luo B, Patel RP, Ling Y, Zhang J, Fallon MB. Modulation of
pulmonary endothelial endothelin B receptor expression and signaling:
implications for experimental hepatopulmonary syndrome. Am J
Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2007;292:L1467–L1472
.
[516] Frossard JL, Schiffer E, Cikirikcioglu B, Bourquin BJ, Morel DR, Pastor
MC. Opposite regulation of endothelial NO synthase by HSP90 and
caveolin in liver and lungs of rats with hepatopulmonary syndrome.
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2007;293:G864–G870
.
[517] Rabiller A, Nunes H, Lebrec D, Tazi KA, Wartski M, Dulmet E, et al.
Prevention of gram-negative translocation reduces the severity of
hepatopulmonary syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:
514–517
.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 53
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[518] Thenappan T, Goel A, Marsboom G, Fang YH, Toth PT, Zhang HJ, et al. A
central role for CD68(1) macrophages in hepatopulmonary syndrome:
reversal by macrophage depletion. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2011;183:1080–1091
.
[519] Zhang J, Yang W, Luo B, Hu B, Maheshwari A, Fallon MB. The role of CX
(3)CL1/CX(3)CR1 in pulmonary angiogenesis and intravascular mono-
cyte accumulation in rat experimental hepatopulmonary syndrome. J
Hepatol 2012;57:752–758
.
[520] Carter EP, Hartsﬁeld CL, Miyazono M, Jakkula M, Morris Jr KG,
McMurtry IF. Regulation of heme oxygenase-1 by nitric oxide during
hepatopulmonary syndrome. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
2002;283:L346–L353
.
[521] Zhang J, Luo B, Tang L, Wang Y, Stockard CR, Kadish I, et al. Pulmonary
angiogenesis in a rat model of hepatopulmonary syndrome. Gastroen-
terology 2009;136:1070–1080
.
[522] Zhang J, Yang W, Hu B, Wu W, Fallon MB. Endothelin-1 activation of the
endothelin B receptor modulates pulmonary endothelial CX3CL1 and
contributes to pulmonary angiogenesis in experimental hepatopul-
monary syndrome. Am J Pathol 2014;184:1706–1714
.
[523] Zeng J, Chen L, Chen B, Lu K, Belguise K, Wang X, et al. MicroRNA-199 a-
5p Regulates the Proliferation of Pulmonary Microvascular Endothelial
Cells in Hepatopulmonary Syndrome. Cell Physiol Biochem
2015;37:1289–1300
.
[524] Roberts KE, Kawut SM, Krowka MJ, Brown Jr RS, Trotter JF, Shah V, et al.
Genetic risk factors for hepatopulmonary syndrome in patients with
advanced liver disease. Gastroenterology 2010;39:130–139
.
[525] Chang CC, Wang SS, Hsieh HG, Lee WS, Chuang CL, Hc Lin, et al.
Rosuvastatin improves hepatopulmonary syndrome through inhibition
of inﬂammatory angiogenesis of lung. Clin Sci 2015;129:449–460
.
[526] Rodriquez-Roisin R, Krowka MJ, Herve P, Fallon MB. ERS (European
Respiratory Society) Task ForcePHD Scientiﬁc Committee. Highlights of
the ERS task force on pulmonary-hepatic vascular disorders (PHD). J
Hepatol 2005;42:924–927
.
[527] Arguedas MR, Singh H, Faulk DK, Fallon MB. Utility of pulse oximetry
screening for hepatopulmonary syndrome. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
2007;5:749–754
.
[528] Hoerning A, Raub S, Neudorf U, Muntjes C, Kathemann S, Lainka E, et al.
Pulse oximetry is insufﬁcient for timely diagnosis of hepatopulmonary
syndrome in children with liver cirrhosis. J Pediatr 2014;164:546–552
.
[529] Horvatits T, Drolz A, Roedl K, Herkner H, Ferlitsch A, Perkmann T, et al.
Von Willebrand factor antigen for detection of hepatopulmonary
syndrome in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2014;61:544–549
.
[530] Köksal D, Kaçar S, Köksal AS, Tüfekçiog ˘lu O, Küçükay F, Okten S, et al.
Evaluation of intrapulmonary vascular dilatations with high-resolution
computed thorax tomography in patients with hepatopulmonary
syndrome. J Clin Gastroenterol 2006;40:77–83
.
[531] Lee KN, Lee HJ, Shin WW, Webb WR. Hypoxemia and liver cirrhosis
(hepatopulmonary syndrome) in eight patients: comparison of the
central and peripheral pulmonary vasculature. Radiology 1999;211:549–553
.
[532] Abrams GA, Jaffe CC, Hoffer PB, Binder HJ, Fallon MB. Diagnostic utility
of contrast echocardiography and lung perfusion scan in patients with
hepatopulmonary syndrome. Gastroenterology 1995;109:
1283–1288
.
[533] Wolfe JD, Tashkin DP, Holly FE, Brachman MB, Genovesi MG. Hypox-
emia of cirrhosis: detection of abnormal small pulmonary vascular
channels by a quantitative radionuclide method. Am J Med
1977;63:746–754
.
[534] Abrams GA, Nanda NC, Dubovsky EV, Krowka MJ, Fallon MB. Use of
macroaggregated albumin lung perfusion scan to diagnose hepatopul-
monary syndrome: a new approach. Gastroenterology 1998;114:
305–310
.
[535] Arguedas MR, Abrams GA, Krowka MJ, Fallon MB. Prospective evalu-
ation of outcomes and predictors of mortality in patients with hepato-
pulmonary syndrome undergoing liver transplantation. Hepatology
2003;37:192–197
.
[536] Kalambokis G, Tsianos EV. Pitfalls in the assessment of intrapulmonary
shunt using lung perfusion scintigraphy in patients with cirrhosis. Liver
Int 2010;31:138–139
.
[537] Kochar R, Tanikella R, Fallon MB. Serial pulse oximetry in hepatopul-
monary syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 2011;56:1862–1868
.
[538] Tanikella R, Philips GM, Faulk DK, Kawut SM, Fallon MB. Pilot study of
pentoxifylline in hepatopulmonary syndrome. Liver Transpl 2008;14:
1199–1203.
[539] Gupta LB, Kumar A, Jaiswal AK, Yusuf J, Metha V, Tyagi S, et al.
Pentoxyfylline therapy for hepatopulmonary syndrome: a piloto study.
Arch Intern Med 2008;168:1820–1823
.
[540] De BK, Dutta D, Pal SK, Gangopadhyay S, Das Baksi S, Pani A. The role of
garlic in hepatopulmonary syndrome: a randomized controlled trial.
Can J Gastroenterol 2010;24:183–188
.
[541] Shaikh SA, Tischer S, Choi EK, Fontana RJ. Good for the lung but bad for
the liver? Garlic-induced hepatotoxicity following liver transplanta-
tion. J Clin Pharm Ther 2017;42:646–648
.
[542] Tsauo J, Weng N, Ma H, Jiang M, Zhao H, Li X. Role of transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunts in the management of hepatopul-
monary syndrome: a systemic literature review. J Vasc Interv Radiol
2015;26:1266–1271
.
[543] Poterucha JJ, Krowka MJ, Dickson ER, Cortese DA, Stanson AW, Krom
RA. Failure of hepatopulmonary syndrome to resolve after liver
transplantation and successful treatment with embolotherapy. Hepa-
tology 1995;21:96–100
.
[544] Krowka MJ, Mandell MS, Ramsay MA, Kawut SM, Fallon MB, Man-
zarbeitia C, et al. Hepatopulmonary syndrome and portopulmonary
hypertension: a report of the multicenter liver transplant database.
Liver Transpl 2004;10:174–182
.
[545] Gupta S, Castel H, Rao RV, Picard M, Lilly L, Faughnan ME, et al.
Improved survival after liver transplantation in patients with hep-
atopulmonary syndrome. Am J Transplant 2010;10:354–363 .
[546] Fallon MB, Mulligan DC, Gish RG, Krowka MJ. Model for end-stage liver
disease (MELD) exception for hepatopulmonary syndrome. Liver
Transpl 2006;12:S105–S107
.
[547] Iyer VN, Swanson KL, Cartin-Ceba R, Dierkhising RA, Rosen CB,
Heimbach JK, et al. Hepatopulmonary syndrome: favorable outcomes
in the MELD exception era. Hepatology 2013;57:427–2435 .
[548] Goldberg DS, Krok K, Batra S, Trotter JF, Kawut SM, Fallon MB. Impact of
the hepatopulmonary syndrome MELD exception policy on outcomes
of patients after liver transplantation: an analysis of the UNOS
database. Gastroenterology 2014;146:1256–1265
.
[549] Fleming GM, Cornell TT, Welling TH, Magee JC, Annich GM. Hepatopul-
monary syndrome use of extracorporeal life support for life-threatening
hypoxia following liver transplantation. Liver Transpl 2008;14:966–970.
[550] Monsel A, Mal H, Brisson H, Luo R, Eyraud D, Vénizet C, et al.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation as a brifge to liver trnsplanta-
tion for acute respiratory distress syndrome-induced life-threatening
hypoxemia aggravated by hepatopulmonary syndrome. Crit Care
2011;15:R234
.
[551] Chihara Y, Egawa H, Tsuboi T, Oga T, Handa T, Yamamoto K, et al.
Immediate nonivasive ventilation may improve mortality in patients
with hepatopulmonary syndrome after liver transplantation. Liver
Transpl 2011;17:44–148
.
[552] McLaughlin VV, Archer SL, Badesch DB, Barst RJ, Farber HW, Lindner JR,
et al. ACCF/AHA 2009 expert consensus document on pulmonary
hypertension a report of the American College of Cardiology Founda-
tion Task Force on Expert Consensus Documents and the American
Heart Association developed in collaboration with the American
College of Chest Physicians; American Thoracic Society, Inc.; and the
Pulmonary Hypertension Association. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:
1573–1619
.
[553] Torregrosa M, Genesca J, Gonzalez A, Evangelista A, Mora A, Margarit C,
et al. Role of Doppler echocardiography in the assessment of portopul-
monary hypertension in liver transplantation candidates. Transplanta-
tion 2001;71:572–574
.
[554] Raevens S, Colle I, Reyntjens K, Geerts A, Berrevoet F, Rogiers X, et al.
Echocardiography for the detection of portopulmonary hypertension in
liver transplant candidates: an analysis of cutoff values. Liver Transpl
2013;19:602–610
.
[555] Cotton CL, Gandhi S, Vaitkus PT, Massad MG, Benedetti E, Mrtek RG,
et al. Role of echocardiography in detecting portopulmonary hyper-
tension in liver transplant candidates. Liver Transpl 2002;8:1051–1054
.
[556] Kawut SM, Krowka MJ, Trotter JF, Roberts KE, Benza RL, Badesch DB,
et al. Clinical risk factors for portopulmonary hypertension. Hepatology
2008;48:196–203
.
[557] Paulus JK, Roberts KE. Oestrogen and sexual Dimorphism of pulmonary
arterial hypertension; a transitional challenge. Eur Respir J 2013;41:
1014–1016
.
[558] Talwalkar JA, Swanson KL, Krowka MJ, Andrews JC, Kamath PS.
Prevalence of spontaneous portosystemic shunts in patients with
portopulmonary hypertension and effect on treatment. Gastroenterol-
ogy 2011;141:1673–1679
.
[559] Hadengue A, Benhayoun MK, Lebrec D, Benhamou JP. Pulmonary
hypertension complicating portal hypertension: prevalence and rela-
tion to splanchnic hemodynamics. Gastroenterology 1991;100:
520–528
.
Clinical Practice Guidelines
54 Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024

[560] Robalino BD, Moodie DS. Association between primary pulmonary
hypertension and portal hypertension: analysis of its pathophysiology
and clinical, laboratory and hemodynamic manifestations. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1991;17:492–498
.
[561] Swanson KL, Wiesner RH, Nyberg SL, Rosen CB, Krowka MJ. Survival in
portopulmonary hypertension: Mayo Clinic experience categorized by
treatment subgroups. Am J Transplant 2008;8:2445–2453
.
[562] Cartin-Ceba R, Krowka MJ. Portopulmonary hypertension. Clin Liver Dis
2014;18:421–438
.
[563] Condino AA, Ivy DD, O’Connor JA, Narkewicz MR, Mengshol S,
Whitworth JR, et al. Portopulmonary hypertension in pediatric patients.
J Pediatr 2005;147:20–26
.
[564] Le Pavec J, Souza R, Herve P, Lebrec D, Savale L, Tcherakian C, et al.
Portopulmonary hypertension: survival and prognostic factors. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2008;178:637–643
.
[565] Krowka MJ, Cartin-Ceba R. Portopulmonary hypertension: formidable
dual threat vs. hopeful dual therapy. Liver Transpl 2014;20:635–636 .
[566] Kawut SM, Horn EM, Berekashvili KK, Garofano RP, Goldsmith RL,
Widlitz AC, et al. New predictors of outcome in idiopathic pulmonary
arterial hypertension. Am J Cardiol 2005;95:199–203
.
[567] Ricci GL, Melgosa MT, Burgos F, Valera JL, Pizarro S, Roca J, et al.
Assessment of acute pulmonary vascular reactivity in portopulmonary
hypertension. Liver Transpl 2007;13:1506–1514
.
[568] Provencher S, Herve P, Jais X, Lebrec D, Humbert M, Simonneau G, et al.
Deleterious effects of beta-blockers on exercise capacity and hemody-
namics in patients with portopulmonary hypertension. Gastroenterol-
ogy 2006;130:120–126
.
[569] Halank M, Miehlke S, Hoeffken G, Schmeisser A, Schulze M, Strasser RH.
Use of oral endothelin-receptor antagonist bosentan in the treatment of
portopulmonary hypertension. Transplantation 2004;77:1775–1776
.
[570] Hoeper MM, Halank M, Marx C, Hoeffken G, Seyfarth HJ, Schauer J, et al.
Bosentan therapy for portopulmonary hypertension. Eur Respir J
2005;25:502–508
.
[571] Savale L, Magnier R, Le Pavec J, Jais X, Montani D, O’Callaghan DS, et al.
Efﬁcacy, safety and pharmacokinetics of bosentan in portopulmonary
hypertension. Eur Respir J 2013;41:96–103
.
[572] Barth F, Gerber PJ, Reichen J, Dufour JF, Nicod LP. Efﬁciency and
safety of bosentan in child C cirrhosis with portopulmonary
hypertension and renal insufﬁciency. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2006;18:1117–1119
.
[573] Hoeper MM, Seyfarth HJ, Hoeffken G, Wirtz H, Spiekerkoetter E, Pletz
MW, et al. Experience with inhaled iloprost and bosentan in portopul-
monary hypertension. Eur Respir J 2007;30:1096–1102
.
[574] Cartin-Ceba R, Swanson K, Iyer V, Wiesner RH, Krowka MJ. Safety and
efﬁcacy of ambrisentan for the treatment of portopulmonary hyper-
tension. Chest 2011;139:109–114
.
[575] DuBrock HM, Channick RN, Krowka MJ. What’s new in the treatment of
portopulmonary hypertension? Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
2015;9:983–992
.
[576] Reichenberger F, Voswinckel R, Steveling E, Enke B, Kreckel A,
Olschewski H, et al. Sildenaﬁl treatment for portopulmonary hyper-
tension. Eur Respir J 2006;28:563–567
.
[577] Cadden IS, Greanya ED, Erb SR, Scudamore CH, Yoshida EM. The use of
sildenaﬁl to treat portopulmonary hypertension prior to liver trans-
plantation. Ann Hepatol 2009;8:158–161
.
[578] Fisher JH, Johnson SR, Chau C, Kron AT, Granton JT. Effectiveness of
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor therapy for portopulmonary hyperten-
sion. Can Respir J 2015;22:42–46
.
[579] Tzathas C, Christidou A, Ladas SD. Sildenaﬁl (viagra) is a risk factor for
acute variceal bleeding. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:1856 .
[580] Kuo PC, Johnson LB, Plotkin JS, Howell CD, Bartlett ST, Rubin LJ.
Continuous intravenous infusion of epoprostenol for the treat-
ment of portopulmonary hypertension. Transplantation 1997;63:
604–606
.
[581] Sussman N, Kaza V, Barshes N, Stribling R, Goss J, O’Mahony C, et al.
Successful liver transplantation following medical management of
portopulmonary hypertension: a single-center series. Am J Transplant
2006;6:2177–2182
.
[582] Fix OK, Bass NM, De Marco T, Merriman RB. Long-term follow-up of
portopulmonary hypertension: effect of treatment with epoprostenol.
Liver Transpl 2007;13:875–885
.
[583] Awdish RL, Cajigas HR. Early initiation of prostacyclin in portopul-
monary hypertension: 10 years of a transplant center’s experience.
Lung 2013;191:593–600
.
[584] Melgosa MT, Ricci GL, Garcia-Pagan JC, Blanco I, Escribano P, Abraldes
JG, et al. Acute and long-term effects of inhaled iloprost in portopul-
monary hypertension. Liver Transpl 2010;16:348–356
.
[585] Colombato LA, Spahr L, Martinet JP, Dufresne MP, Lafortune M, Fenyves
D, et al. Haemodynamic adaptation two months after transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) in cirrhotic patients. Gut
1996;39:600–604
.
[586] Boyer TD, Haskal ZJ. American Association for the Study of Liver D. The
Role of Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS) in the
Management of Portal Hypertension: update 2009. Hepatology
2010;51:306
.
[587] Yoshida EM, Erb SR, Pﬂugfelder PW, Ostrow DN, Ricci DR, Ghent CN,
et al. Single-lung vs. liver transplantation for the treatment of
portopulmonary hypertension–a comparison of two patients. Trans-
plantation 1993;55:688–690
.
[588] Krowka MJ, Wiesner RH, Heimbach JK. Pulmonary contraindications,
indications and MELD exceptions for liver transplantation: a contem-
porary view and look forward. J Hepatol 2013;59:367–374
.
[589] Kuo PC, Plotkin JS, Gaine S, Schroeder RA, Rustgi VK, Rubin LJ, et al.
Portopulmonary hypertension and the liver transplant candidate.
Transplantation 1999;67:1087–1093 .
[590] Krowka MJ, Plevak DJ, Findlay JY, Rosen CB, Wiesner RH, Krom RA.
Pulmonary hemodynamics and perioperative cardiopulmonary-related
mortality in patients with portopulmonary hypertension undergoing
liver transplantation. Liver Transpl 2000;6:443–450
.
[591] Mangus RS, Kinsella SB, Marshall GR, Fridell JA, Wilkes KR, Tector AJ.
Mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension in liver transplantation. J
Surg Res 2013;184:1150–1156
.
[592] Raevens S, De Pauw M, Reyntjens K, Geerts A, Verhelst X, Berrevoet F,
et al. Oral vasodilator therapy in patients with moderate to severe
portopulmonary hypertension as a bridge to liver transplantation. Eur J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;25:495–502
.
[593] Ramsay MA, Simpson BR, Nguyen AT, Ramsay KJ, East C, Klintmalm GB.
Severe pulmonary hypertension in liver transplant candidates. Liver
Transpl Surg 1997;3:494–500
.
[594] Krowka MJ, Fallon MB, Mulligan DC, Gish RG. Model for end-stage liver
disease (MELD) exception for portopulmonary hypertension. Liver
Transpl 2006;12:S114–S116
.
[595] DuBrock HM, Goldberg DS, Sussman NL, Bartolome SD, Kadry Z, Salgia
RJ, et al. Predictors of waitlist mortality in portopulmonary hyperten-
sion. Transplantation 2017;101:1609–1615
.
[596] Ramsay M. Portopulmonary hypertension and right heart failure in
patients with cirrhosis. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2010;23:145–150
.
[597] Paulsen AW, Whitten CW, Ramsay MA, Klintmalm GB. Considerations
for anesthetic management during veno-venous bypass in adult
hepatic transplantation. Anesth Analg 1989;68:489–496
.
[598] Ramsay MA, Spikes C, East CA, Lynch K, Hein HA, Ramsay KJ, et al. The
perioperative management of portopulmonary hypertension with
nitric oxide and epoprostenol. Anesthesiology 1999;90:299–301
.
[599] Stratta C, Lavezzo B, Ballaris MA, Panio A, Crucitti M, Andruetto P, et al.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation rescue therapy in a case of
portopulmonary hypertension during liver transplantation: a case
report. Transplant Proc 2013;45:2774–2775
.
[600] Ashfaq M, Chinnakotla S, Rogers L, Ausloos K, Saadeh S, Klintmalm GB,
et al. The impact of treatment of portopulmonary hypertension on
survival following liver transplantation. Am J Transplant
2007;7:1258–1264
.
[601] Hollatz TJ, Musat A, Westphal S, Decker C, D’Alessandro AM, Keevil J,
et al. Treatment with sildenaﬁl and treprostinil allows successful liver
transplantation of patients with moderate to severe portopulmonary
hypertension. Liver Transpl 2012;18:686–695
.
[602] Khaderi S, Khan R, Safdar Z, Stribling R, Vierling JM, Goss JA, et al. Long-
term follow-up of portopulmonary hypertension patients after liver
transplantation. Liver Transpl 2014;20:724–727
.
[603] Goldberg DS, Batra S, Sahay S, Kawut SM, Fallon MB. MELD exceptions
for portopulmonary hypertension: current policy and future imple-
mentation. Am J Transplant 2014;14:2081–2087
.
[604] Morando F, Maresio G, Piano S, Fasolato S, Cavallin M, Romano A, et al.
How to improve care in outpatients with cirrhosis and ascites: a new
model of care coordination by consultant hepatologists. J Hepatol
2013;59:257–264
.
JOURNAL 
OF HEPATOLOGY
Journal of Hepatology 2018 vol. xxx j xxx–xxx 55
Please cite this article in press as: The European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of pati ents with decompensated cirrhosis. J
Hepatol (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.024