thiazide-type diuretics first-line 2017 guideline - Yahoo Search Results Yahoo Settings Home Mail News Finance Sports Weather Help Settings Sign In Waiting for permission Allow microphone access to enable voice search Try saying All Images Videos News Local Shopping More Anytime Past day Past week Past month Anytime Search Results AHA/ASA Journals https://www.ahajournals.org › doi › 10 Thiazide-Type Diuretics and β-Adrenergic Blockers as First ... May 20, 2008 · We summarize that evidence in this article, in approximate chronological order, and we comment on the related treatment guidelines . We close with some of the major clinical questions yet to be resolved. pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › articles › PMC2897820 Thiazide-type diuretics and beta-adrenergic blockers as first ... We summarize that evidence in this paper, in approximate chronological order, and we comment on the related treatment guidelines . We close with some of the major clinical questions yet to be resolved. Searches related to "thiazide-type diuretics" "first-line" 2017 guideline thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline pdf thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline answers thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline download thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline 1 thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline book thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline edition thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline printable thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline 2023 AAFP https://www.aafp.org › afp › 2023 Thiazide Diuretics vs. Other Antihypertensive Drug Classes ... Based on data from the meta-analysis, there is likely no difference in total mortality between thiazide diuretics and other antihypertensives for first - line treatment (moderate-certainty... hypertension.cochrane.org https://hypertension.cochrane.org › news › first-line First‐line diuretics versus other classes of antihypertensive ... Thiazides and thiazide‐like drugs (diuretics) probably decrease some adverse cardiovascular events compared to beta‐blockers, calcium channel blockers, ACE inhibitors, and alpha‐blockers when used as the first ‐ line drug for the treatment of hypertension. Oxford Academic https://academic.oup.com › ajh › article Thiazide and the Thiazide-Like Diuretics: Review of ... Apr 11, 2022 · Importantly, a thiazide-based treatment regimen lowers cardiovascular events, and their sturdy effect reinforces their place among the recommended first - line agents to treat hypertension in major domestic and international hypertension guidelines . droracle.ai https://www.droracle.ai › articles › 627337 Are diuretics (such as hydrochlorothiazide or chlorthalidone ... Dec 17, 2025 · Yes, diuretics are recommended as first - line treatment for hypertension, with thiazide- type diuretics (particularly chlorthalidone) being the preferred choice based on proven cardiovascular mortality and morbidity reduction. 1 PubMed https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › 37439548 First-line diuretics versus other classes of antihypertensive ... Jul 13, 2023 · Objectives: To compare the effects of first - line diuretic drugs with other individual first - line classes of antihypertensive drugs on mortality, morbidity, and withdrawals due to adverse effects in patients with hypertension. People also ask Are thiazide-like diuretics a first-line treatment for hypertension? Thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics are recommended as first-line therapy for treatment of hypertension (among other classes including ACEI/ARBs and long-acting dihydropyridine CCBs) when part of a 2-drug combination. Thiazide and the Thiazide-Like Diuretics: Review of Hydrochlorothiazide academic.oup.com/ajh/article/35/7/573/6566542 See all results for this question Are thiazides a good first-line treatment for hypertension? Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. When used as first-line agents for the treatment of hypertension, thiazides and thiazide-like drugs likely do not change total mortality and likely decrease some morbidity outcomes such as cardiovascular events and withdrawals due to adverse effects, when compared to beta-blockers, calcium channel b … First-line diuretics versus other classes of antihypertensive ... - PubMed pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37439548/ See all results for this question Are thiazide diuretics effective? Thiazide diuretics emerged in the late 1950s as the first orally effective and well-tolerated antihypertensive agents. More than a half-century later, they remain among the first-line medications for the treatment of hypertension . Thiazide and the Thiazide-Like Diuretics: Review of Hydrochlorothiazide academic.oup.com/ajh/article/35/7/573/6566542 See all results for this question Are low-dose thiazide diuretics safe? First-line low-dose thiazide diuretics have been previously shown to have the best mortality and morbidity evidence when compared with placebo or no treatment . Head-to-head comparisons of thiazides with other blood pressure-lowering drug classes would demonstrate whether there are important differences. First-line diuretics versus other classes of antihypertensive ... - PubMed pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37439548/ See all results for this question Searches related to "thiazide-type diuretics" "first-line" 2017 guideline thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline pdf thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline book thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline download thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline answers thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline printable thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline edition thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline 1 thiazide - type diuretics first - line 2017 guideline 2023 1 2 3 4 5 Next People also search for Report a concern Help Suggestions Terms Privacy EU DSA contact Privacy & Cookie Settings Advertise About ads About this page Powered by Bing™