"Long-term administration of diuretics" lymphedema - Brave Search Ask All Images News Videos Maps Goggles search operators were not applied Too few matches were found More Ovid ovid.com › jnls › ebp › fulltext › 10.1097 › 01.ebp.0000540858.92830.33~are-diuretics-effective-for-idiopathic-lymphedema Are diuretics effective for idiopathic lymphedema? : Evidence-Based Practice Long-term use of diuretics for treatment of lymphedema or for treatment of the later stages of lymphedema is probably ineffective and has an unacceptable adverse effect profile (SOR: C, expert opinion). lmtnew longwellmassagetherapy.com › post › why-diuretics-don-t-work-for-lymphedema Lymphedema and Diuretics: Why Diuretics Don’t Work for Lymphedema April 17, 2026 - Lymphedema is a lymphatic condition, not a fluid overload problem. Diuretics target the kidneys and bloodstream—not the lymphatic system—making them an ineffective and sometimes counterproductive treatment option . Lippincott Williams & Wilkins journals.lww.com › ebp › abstract › 2014 › 12000 › are_diuretics_effective_for_idiopathic_lymphedema_.11.aspx Are diuretics effective for idiopathic lymphedema? : Evidence-Based Practice Long-term use of diuretics for treatment of lymphedema or for treatment of the later stages of lymphedema is probably ineffective and has an unacceptable adverse effect profile (SOR: C, expert opinion). Haltmyswelling haltmyswelling.com › home › should you take diuretics for lymphedema? Should You Take Diuretics for Lymphedema? - Pain & Swelling Solutions November 23, 2023 - Dehydrated tissues are less elastic, making it more challenging for the lymphatic vessels to transport fluid. This can worsen swelling and increase discomfort. No Long-Term Benefits : Even if diuretics provide temporary relief from swelling, the effects are short-lived. ScienceInsights scienceinsights.org › do-water-pills-help-lymphedema-what-actually-works Do Water Pills Help Lymphedema? What Actually Works - ScienceInsights March 7, 2026 - Water pills (diuretics) do not help with lymphedema and can actually make it worse . The International Society of Lymphology explicitly recommends against using diuretics for lymphedema treatment, calling them both ineffective and potentially harmful. Lymphedasia lymphedasia.com › home › do diuretics help lymphedema do diuretics help lymphedema December 9, 2024 - However, lymphedema involves lymphatic fluid, not just general water retention. Study 1 (2022): A comprehensive review published in The Lymphatic Research Journal found limited evidence supporting diuretics for long-term lymphedema management . PubMed Central pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › articles › PMC3595870 Recent Advances in Medical Treatment for Lymphedema - PMC Checking your browser before accessing pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov · Click here if you are not automatically redirected after 5 seconds Lymphoedema Support Network lymphoedema.org › home › information › your questions answered Your Questions Answered | Lymphoedema Support Network - LSN April 12, 2023 - Diuretics or water tablets are generally not recommended for lymphoedema . However, they may be used when swelling is severe/complicated or in circumstances where there may be more than one cause for the swelling (e.g. heart/renal problems). Never stop taking prescribed medication without first ... Lippincott Williams & Wilkins journals.lww.com › ebp › abstract › 2010 › 11000 › are_diuretics_safe_and_effective_for_iymphedema_.13.aspx Are diuretics safe and effective for Iymphedema? : Evidence-Based Practice No. Diuretics are not recommended for the treatment of lymphedema uncomplicated by other morbidities . Chronic diuretic use can cause electrolyte abnormalities and an overall worsening of the condition. Acibadem Health Point acibademhealthpoint.com › home › diuretic and lymphedema: causes and management Diuretic and Lymphedema: Causes and Management | Acibadem Health Point - ACIBADEM Hospitals - Acibadem Health Group June 5, 2025 - However, they are ineffective for lymphedema because the issue lies in the lymphatic system, not the kidneys. Studies suggest that using these medications long-term may even worsen fibrosis, a complication of this condition . Find elsewhere Google Bing Mojeek Acibadem Health Point acibademhealthpoint.com › home › why are diuretics contraindicated in lymphedema: explained Why Are Diuretics Contraindicated in Lymphedema: Explained | Acibadem Health Point - ACIBADEM Hospitals - Acibadem Health Group December 8, 2025 - Diuretics fail to address the protein-rich fluid that causes lymphedema . Instead, they can exacerbate fibrosis, a hardening of tissues due to fibrin deposition. Case studies show that 68% of patients experienced worsened fibrosis after diuretic use. Acibadem Health Point acibademhealthpoint.com › home › diuretics contraindicated in lymphedema: risks explained Diuretics Contraindicated in Lymphedema: Risks Explained | Acibadem Health Point - ACIBADEM Hospitals - Acibadem Health Group June 5, 2025 - Unlike compression therapy, which has an 80% success rate, diuretics are not a long-term solution . Diuretics primarily target fluid in the bloodstream, not the protein-rich fluid trapped in tissues. This makes them ineffective for lymphedema. ResearchGate researchgate.net › publication › 349509341_Are_diuretics_effective_for_idiopathic_lymphedemaquest Are diuretics effective for idiopathic lymphedema&quest; December 1, 2014 - Evidence&hyphen;Based Answer Long&hyphen;term use of diuretics for treatment of lymphedema or for treatment of the later stages of lymphedema is probably ineffective and has an unacceptable adverse effect profile &lpar;SOR&colon; C, expert ... HealthUnlocked healthunlocked.com › lsn › posts › 136266610 › diuretics-and-lymphedema-yes-or-no Diuretics and lymphedema- yes or no? | LSN | HealthUnlocked January 25, 2025 - Short term diuretics act like a magic wand - but long term can exacerbate Lymphoedema - it removes tissue fluid, but leaves behind protein, which builds up over time. Reddit reddit.com › r/lymphedema › diuretic r/Lymphedema on Reddit: Diuretic July 31, 2025 - My doctor, and a lot of what I have read, suggested that my lymphedema would not respond positively to diuretic medication. But he said that if I wanted to, I could "try" a small - 20mg - dose of furosemide for a couple of weeks to see if it makes any difference. I did. And it has!! It has definitely made a difference. I have noticed that my lower leg and my foot in particular, have reduced in size, to the point that I can now wear normal shoes again. And I have gone several days without wearing my stocking during the day. I have still been using my comfywave at night time. My leg does still tend to swell up a bit during the day, and the thigh does get a bit thicker, so I don't think I will stop wearing the day one long term, but it was nice on a few occasions not to need to wear it. :-) I also don't have as deep a ring around the leg from socks. and I think also the indents that were left in my skin from pressing thumbs in seems not as deep as before. So all in all I am inclined to want to continue taking the furosemide - but I am also aware that long term use of diuretics is not necessarily a good thing. I am also confused that how come it had a good effect for me, given that everything I have read suggests it would have no real effect. So all in all I am inclined to want to continue taking the furosemide - but I am also aware that long term use of diuretics is not necessarily a good thing. I would be interested to hear the experiences of others who have tried diuretics. Top answer 1 of 5 21 If a diuretic works for you then I suspect you have another problem in addition to lymphedema. 2 of 5 8 It may be reducing the fluid and swelling,but notin a good way.It is concentrating the lymphatic fluid, the water reduced,but not the cell waste and proteins ,so they will still be hanging around under the skin,they clump together,molecules get bigger, then it is even harder to get them to move along, they deposit fats ,get fibrotic and solid,which can not be reduced . Our bodies keep making and processing fluids every day, every hour, It is much better for you long term to learn how to move the swelling manually, with good compression,lymph moving movements, plenty of hydration,skin care, self lymphatic massage .It can be as simple as habit stacking little things like some deep breathing before shower, rubbing behind knees every time you go to the loo.Calf raises while the kettle boils .Marching on the spot every now and then during the day to massage the groin nodes...all things to naturally help your fluid a little faster ,so it doesn't back up and linger,or into the flesh .and cause swelling.We just have to learn to 'empty the drain hole' ie massage our lymph nodes clusters ,to then help move the fluid along its pathways towards the drains ,where it moves back into our circulatory system where it wants and needs to go to continue. Fluid tablets may help other health conditions. But if it is being used only for Lymphodema swelling, you may be taking a short cut now but making a lot more problems for yourself later. Reddit reddit.com › r/lymphedema › diuretics and lymphedema r/Lymphedema on Reddit: Diuretics and lymphedema September 18, 2025 - Doctors will often try to put you on diuretics for your swollen legs/arms. Diuretics can make your lymphedema worse or at best be useless. Find yourself a CERTIFIED Lymphedema Physical Therapist (CLPT) who knows their stuff and can educate you. Top answer 1 of 5 5 Not always true. I have vascular and heart issues. The diuretics help my heart work less and I’m less swollen. However- if I take diuretics and caffeine. That will cause my lymphedema & lipodema so much worse. 2 of 5 4 I feel like they do this to try to rule out water retention, and then when it doesn't work go "I dunno, sorry", at least that has been my experience. Acibadem Health Point acibademhealthpoint.com › home › the best diuretic for lymphedema: relief and management The Best Diuretic for Lymphedema: Relief and Management | Acibadem Health Point - ACIBADEM Hospitals - Acibadem Health Group June 3, 2025 - Diuretics may provide temporary ... the medication is discontinued. This recurrence highlights the lack of long-term benefits associated with diuretic use .... Frontiers frontiersin.org › journals › pharmacology › articles › 10.3389 › fphar.2022.850586 › full Frontiers | Drug-Related Lymphedema: Mysteries, Mechanisms, and Potential Therapies February 11, 2022 - The limited clinical utility of diuretics in the treatment of lymphedema may relate in part to the high osmotic pressure of fluid in the interstitial space distal to impaired lymphatic drainage, which is caused by protein accumulation in the extracellular space. The elevated osmotic pressure may facilitate rebound fluid accumulation after diuretic administration to maintain and perpetuate the development of lymphedema (Harris et al., 2001). Drooracle droracle.ai › articles › 374264 › do-diuretics-help-treat-lymphedema Do diuretics help treat lymphedema? September 30, 2025 - Diuretics are not recommended for the treatment of lymphedema as they are physiologically unsound and ineffective for pure lymphedema . [@{"id":1,"title":"The... Acibadem Health Point acibademhealthpoint.com › home › lymphedema responds well to diuretic medication lymphedema responds well to diuretic medication | Acibadem Health Point - ACIBADEM Hospitals - Acibadem Health Group June 5, 2025 - Understanding the role of diuretics in treating specific conditions is crucial. While they provide short-term relief for swelling, their long-term use must be carefully monitored to avoid complications. lymphedema responds well to diuretic medication Not all swelling is the same, and diuretics can’t address every type of fluid buildup. Next Resources Brave Search Premium Brave Search Help Transparency Report Report a security issue Status Products Brave Browser Brave Search Brave Wallet Brave Talk Brave Firewall + VPN Brave Playlist Brave News Brave Rewards Brave Search API Brave Ads Policies Privacy Policy Terms of Use