"Long-term administration of diuretics is discouraged" - Brave Search Ask All Images News Videos Maps Goggles search operators were not applied Too few matches were found More NCBI ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › books › NBK557838 Therapeutic Uses of Diuretic Agents - StatPearls - NCBI Bookshelf May 29, 2023 - Thus RBCs act as a reservoir, and the drug is released into the plasma gradually, which can be utilized clinically by a once-daily dosing regimen.[99] Hydrochlorothiazide, in contrast, has a shorter half-life of about 6 to 9 hours, but this increases with long-term dosing, and some studies thus recommend once-daily dosing for this drug as well. Hydrochlorothiazide is a pregnancy category B medication.[100] While loop diuretics are recommended in all stages of CKD, Thiazides are advised only in stages 1 to 3. DOI doi.org › 10.3390 › jcdd13080395 Diuretics in Cardiovascular Disease: For How Long and at What Dose? 2 weeks ago - This distinction is clinically ... congestion may promote hypotension, renal dysfunction, electrolyte instability, neurohormonal activation, falls, cognitive impairment and avoidable polypharmacy .... PubMed Central pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › articles › PMC8109680 Diuretic‐Related Side Effects: Development and Treatment Checking your browser before accessing pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov · Click here if you are not automatically redirected after 5 seconds JAMA Network jamanetwork.com › jama network › jama internal medicine › influence of long-term, low-dose, diuretic-based, antihypertensive therapy on glucose, lipid, uric acid, and Influence of Long-term, Low-Dose, Diuretic-Based, Antihypertensive Therapy on Glucose, Lipid, Uric Acid, and Potassium Levels in Older Men and Women With Isolated Systolic Hypertension: The Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program | Cardiology | JAMA Internal Medicine | JAMA Network April 13, 1998 - Background Previous studies often of short duration have raised concerns that antihypertensive therapy with diuretics and β-blockers adversely alters levels of other cardiovascular disease risk factors.Methods The Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program was a community-based,... NCBI ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › books › NBK546656 Loop Diuretics - StatPearls - NCBI Bookshelf May 22, 2023 - Loop diuretics are medications used in the management and treatment of fluid overload conditions such as heart failure, nephrotic syndrome or cirrhosis, and hypertension, in addition to edema. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for loop diuretics as a valuable ... Today's Geriatric Medicine todaysgeriatricmedicine.com › archive › 110113p5.shtml Evaluating Potential Diuretic Overuse Today's Geriatric Medicine - News & Insight for Professionals in Elder Care PubMed pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › 9284668 Withdrawal of long-term diuretic medication in elderly ... Checking your browser before accessing pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov · Click here if you are not automatically redirected after 5 seconds PubMed pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › 6204151 Diuretics in long-term treatment of hypertension Checking your browser before accessing pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov · Click here if you are not automatically redirected after 5 seconds Verywell Health verywellhealth.com › complete-guide-to-diuretics-1124128 Everything You Need to Know About Diuretics April 17, 2026 - Diuretics sometimes need to be taken long-term, but in other cases, they might be stopped once symptoms improve. ScienceDirect sciencedirect.com › science › article › abs › pii › S0953620517300365 Use, misuse and abuse of diuretics - ScienceDirect February 21, 2017 - However, since about 90% of uric ... limited. On the other hand, it has been well known that high dose or long term use of diuretics increases the risk of renal failure (Bartoli et al., 2017).... Find elsewhere Google Bing Mojeek PubMed pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › 2184653 Long-term diuretic therapy and renal function in essential arterial hypertension - PubMed May 2, 1990 - One of the main objectives of antihypertensive therapy is to preserve renal function from the deleterious effects of elevated blood pressure. Diuretics alone or in combination are effective for the treatment of arterial hypertension. Nevertheless, their use is accompanied by unwanted biochemical side effects, which have been attributed to their renal effects. AHA Journals ahajournals.org › doi › 10.1161 › 01.cir.100.12.1311 Diuretics and Risk of Arrhythmic Death in Patients With Left Ventricular Dysfunction | Circulation In the Swedish Trial in Old Patients with Hypertension (STOP-Hypertension trial),2 which included as a primary therapy a combination of a potassium-sparing agent with a thiazide diuretic but not a thiazide diuretic alone, antihypertensive treatment reduced the risk of sudden death 70%. In contrast, the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP),15 which showed that stroke, coronary events, and heart failure incidence in hypertensive patients is improved by diuretic treatment, revealed no effect of thiazide treatment without a potassium-sparing agent on the incidence of sudden cardiac death. Given the very large numbers of patients who receive long-term treatment with diuretics, it is important to determine which patient characteristics might identify a group at increased risk for arrhythmic death and which adjunctive therapy might reduce this risk. AHA Journals ahajournals.org › doi › pdf › 10.1161 › 01.HYP.11.3_Pt_2.II16 pdf Diuretics and Their Side Effects Dilemma in the Treatment of Hypertension Diuretics and Their Side Effects · Dilemma in the Treatment of Hypertension MedlinePlus medlineplus.gov › home › drugs, herbs and supplements Furosemide: MedlinePlus Drug Information Furosemide is used alone or with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Furosemide is used to treat edema excess fluid held in body tissues caused by various medical problems. Furosemide is in a class of medications called diuretics ('water pills'). SimpleNursing simplenursing.com › homepage › blog › crucial nursing precautions for administering diuretics Administration of Diuretics: Key Nursing Precautions Explained 02:01 Manage patients on diuretics, including dietary adjustments, monitoring fluid balance, and the effects on blood pressure and heart rate. Published: June 9, 2026 Views: 356K Rush Memorial Hospital rushmemorial.com › home › healthy lifestyle › “water pills” can have serious side effects “Water Pills” Can Have Serious Side Effects - Rush Memorial Hospital March 10, 2021 - “Water pills”, or diuretics, are often used to treat high blood pressure. While they are very effective in lowering blood pressure, however, they can also have serious side effects. These side effects are directly linked to how diuretics work. As anyone who has taken them knows, diuretics ... Physiopedia physio-pedia.com › Diuretics_in_the_Treatment_of_Hypertension Diuretics in the Treatment of Hypertension - Physiopedia With this inhibition, more sodium stays within the nephron creating an osmotic force that allows for water retention in the nephron, and ultimately water excretion.[2] Thiazide diuretics are considered the drug of choice for long term treatment of hypertension by many physicians.[3] PubMed pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › 23510827 Morbus diureticus in the elderly: epidemic overuse of a ... Checking your browser before accessing pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov · Click here if you are not automatically redirected after 5 seconds AHA Journals ahajournals.org › doi › 10.1161 › HYPERTENSIONAHA.120.15205 Pathophysiology of Diuretic Resistance and Its Implications for the Management of Chronic Heart Failure | Hypertension Diuretic resistance implies a failure to increase fluid and sodium (Na+) output sufficiently to relieve volume overload, edema, or congestion , despite escalating doses of a loop diuretic to a ceiling level (80 mg of furosemide once or twice ... Heart Failure Matters heartfailurematters.org › home › heart failure treatment: what your care team can do and why › diuretics Diuretics for Heart Failure Patients June 16, 2026 - Diuretics will ease the symptoms of heart failure, in particular, they will reduce breathlessness and swelling caused by fluid retention. Long-term diuretic use can cause you to lose potassium , a salt which is needed for your body and heart ... Next Resources Brave Search Premium Brave Search Help Transparency Report Report a security issue Status Products Brave Browser Brave Search Brave Wallet Brave Talk Brave Firewall + VPN Brave Playlist Brave News Brave Rewards Brave Search API Brave Ads Policies Privacy Policy Terms of Use