Practice Guidelines | AASLD Skip to content AASLD Family of Websites: AASLD.org AASLD Foundation LiverLearning Career Center Journals The Liver Meeting Liver Fellow Network HCV Guidelines Membership Become a Member Membership Benefits Get Involved Manage Membership Visit AASLD SIGnal Special Interest Groups Member Committees Contact Us Log In Search Search Main navigation Practice Guidelines Practice Guidelines Patient Guidelines Quality Measures Meetings & Events The Liver Meeting Events and Webinars Photo and Video Disclaimer Learning & Growth LiverLearning Early Career Resources Hepatology Training Pathways 2026 Transplant Hepatology Board Review Course Transplant Hepatology Fellowship Application Grants and Awards Abstract Awards Emerging Liver Scholars Program Project Portal & Project Innovation Awards Research and Career Development Awards AASLD Career Center COVID-19 and the Liver Clinician Resources Patient Resources AASLD Project Portal Endorsement Policy Journals & News Journals News About AASLD Who We Are Governance 2027 AASLD Leadership Nominations 2026 Distinguished Awards AASLD Constitution and Bylaws Code for the Assessment and Management of Conflict of Interest Governing Board Past Presidents Strategic Plan AASLD Foundation Donate Memorial Travel Award Program Our Story, Vision and Mission Research and Career Development Awards Programs and Initiatives Elevating Liver Health Advocacy: AASLD's Impact on Capitol Hill New MASLD Nomenclature Associate Fellows Cirrhosis Quality Collaborative Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Fellows Program Global Outreach and Engagement Public Policy HCV Elimination Coalition Policy Action Center Policy Communications Our Staff AASLD Careers In Memoriam Home Practice Guidelines Practice Guidelines AASLD’s practice guidelines provide evidence-based recommendations and outline appropriate methods of treatment and care for clinicians. The guidelines are developed by multidisciplinary panels of experts who rate the quality (level) of the evidence and strength of each recommendation using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation system or, in some unique cases, Oxford Levels of Evidence Grading. Patient representation is an important component in the development of clinical practice guidelines and is a priority for inclusion in future guideline panels. Historically, AASLD has developed practice guidances which are put forward to help clinicians understand and implement the most recent evidence based on comprehensive review and analysis of the literature. Recently AASLD has published guidances on aspects of a topic that lacked sufficient data to perform systematic reviews or rate the quality (level) of the evidence. While AASLD is committed to focusing on practice guidelines, the established practice guidances remain valid, essential resources for the hepatology community. Additionally, AASLD develops quality measures to help its members measure or quantify healthcare processes and outcomes that are associated with the ability to provide high-quality health care. Read more about AASLD’s historical policy for practice guidelines and guidances , learn about AASLD’s conflict of interest policy in an article excerpted from Hepatology, or review AASLD's Code for the Assessment and Management of Conflict of Interest . Evolution of Practice Guideline Development Process AASLD recognizes that practice guidelines are an instrumental resource for the health care community to identify, diagnose, treat, and manage care of patients with liver disease. AASLD remains committed to developing rigorous, credible, and transparent Practice Guidelines. Our practice guideline program is currently evolving to prioritize industry-accepted processes that include methodologies for levels of evidence assessment, patient representation, member input on future topics, public feedback, and diverse forms of content dissemination. Learn more about AASLD’s commitment to provide the best practice guidelines to our members and the community. Learn More Guidelines and Guidance by Disease Acute Liver Failure, Management Acute-on-Chronic Liver Failure and the Management Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease Ascites, Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis and Hepatorenal Syndrome, Management Autoimmune Hepatitis, Management Drug, Herbal, and Dietary Supplement-induced Liver Injury Hemochromatosis, Management Hepatic Encephalopathy Hepatitis B, Chronic Hepatitis C, Guidance Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Management Liver Biopsy Liver Transplantation Malnutrition, Frailty, and Sarcopenia in Patients with Cirrhosis Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatotic Liver Disease and Clinical Assessment and Management Noninvasive Liver Disease Assessment Palliative Care and Symptom-Based Management for Decompensated Cirrhosis Portal Hypertension Bleeding in Cirrhosis, Guidance Primary Biliary Cholangitis Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis and Cholangiocarcinoma Reproductive Health and Liver Disease TIPS, Variceal Embolization, and Retrograde Transvenous Obliteration Vascular Disorders of the Liver Wilson Disease, Diagnosis and Treatment Show Guidelines Development Guidelines Development AASLD strives to review and update its practice guidelines every five (5) years, as necessary. Users are cautioned that in the interim, scientific and medical developments may supersede or invalidate, in whole or in part, specific recommendations in any guideline. A guideline is considered to be "inactive" if it has not been updated by AASLD in at least five (5) years, and for this reason particular care must be exercised in placing reliance on an inactive guideline. AASLD commissions and provides financial support for the formulation and production of practice guidelines/guidances by volunteer experts. Financial support from commercial entities or the pharmaceutical industry is not accepted for the development of AASLD practice guidelines. Expert-Based Practice Opinions (EXPOs) AASLD’s Expert-Based Practice Opinions (EXPOs) serve as a complementary resource to the GRADE-based Practice Guidelines. EXPOs provide concise, clinically relevant recommendations for areas of hepatology where evidence is limited, emerging, or evolving too rapidly to support a formal GRADE-based Practice Guideline. EXPOs may also update existing AASLD Practice Guidelines, providing perspectives on evolving practice and clinical considerations when a full GRADE-based update is not required. Developed by writing groups of subject matter experts, EXPOs combine focused evidence review with expert interpretation and consensus to support informed clinical decision-making. Quality Measures Quality measures are a tool for providers and institutions to evaluate their care quality, drive quality improvement, and deliver high-value patient care. View Quality Measures Patient Guidelines Patient Guidances are adaptations of published AASLD guidances which are written specifically for patients to help them understand their liver disease. Clinicians may also provide these patient guidances to their patients as a resource during consultations. View Patient Guidelines Citing Practice Guidelines and Guidances AASLD practice guidelines and guidances are copyright protected. One copy may be accessed for personal research, scientific, scholarly or informational purposes and may be transmitted to a third-party colleague in hard copy or electronically for similar use. One figure, table or brief excerpt less than 400 words may be used in one’s scientific, scholarly and educational work with appropriate credit. Permission is required to reproduce more than one figure, table, or section over 400 words or complete practice guidelines and guidances for systematic redistribution. Re-sale and posting AASLD practice guidelines and guidances on other websites are not allowed; however, linking to these documents is permitted. Contact jthomas@aasld.org for assistance. Related Information Fundamentals of Liver Diseases This robust program offers learners everything they need to know about the basics of liver disease. If you’re new to the field, encounter liver disease in your patients, or just looking to brush up on your Hepatology 101, this free course is for you. Access the Curriculum Conflict of Interest AASLD must insure that its membership, leadership and the public-at-large understand the importance it places on identification and resolution of conflicts. Learn More AASLD SIGnal AASLD SIGnal is an exclusive member forum where you can connect with experts on a variety of topics to help advance the science of hepatology. Join the Conversation COVID-19 and the Liver AASLD created a variety of resources to help hepatologists and liver patients navigate COVID-19. Stay Informed Have Questions? Contact Us Follow Us Terms of Use & Privacy Policy Patient Education © 2026 copyright