Diagnosis of cystic fibrosis - Cystic Fibrosis - NCBI Bookshelf Your browser does not support the NLM PubReader view. Go to this page to see a list of supported browsers or return to the regular view . Books Prev 5, Diagnosis of cystic fibrosis Cystic Fibrosis: Diagnosis and management Next ? Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done NCBI Bookshelf Home Browse All Titles Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Done Table of Content Title Information Table of Contents Page Done Settings A- A+ AUTO Switch to classic view PDF (15M) Print View Done Help Help Send us feedback About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ 5 Diagnosis of cystic fibrosis Publication Details Review question: In infants, children, young people and adults (including those that have undergone new-born screening) when should cystic fibrosis be suspected? 5.1. Introduction Today, most people with cystic fibrosis will be diagnosed at birth as part of the national Newborn Screening Programme using the blood spot immunoreactive trypsin test. Screening was introduced UK-wide in 2006 and so there remains a cohort of young people and adults with cystic fibrosis who have not been screened and yet have been diagnosed through a clinical assessment. Although highly successful, the Programme is not able to screen for all cystic fibrosis associated genetic variants and so some infants will inevitably remain undiagnosed. It should be noted that over 2,000 mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene have been identified. Many of these variants are rare and have not been shown to lead to clinical disease and therefore their clinical significance can be unclear. Of these 2,000 variants, around 200 have been shown to lead to cystic fibrosis disease. Although only common disease-associated variants are tested for as part of the Newborn Screening Programme. Additionally, infants may not undergo newborn screening due to parent’s wishes or if newborn screening is not carried out in the country of birth. People with atypical manifestations of cystic fibrosis can reach adulthood undiagnosed and therefore untreated when clinical intervention would beneficial. Given the potential for people with cystic fibrosis to remain undiagnosed at all stages in life this review aims to determine what symptoms may indicate a possibility of cystic fibrosis and so warrant further investigation. 5.2. Description of clinical evidence The aim of this review was to support health care professionals in identifying cystic fibrosis even in people who have been through new-born screening. In this review, our index test were clinical symptoms and signs, including: Respiratory features (including recurrent infection, chest x-ray evidence of chronic disease) Faltering growth Symptoms of malabsorption Azoospermia Acute pancreatitis Meconium ileus (in infants). The committee agreed DIOS is known to be a symptom unique to cystic fibrosis, and therefore there was not need to include it in the review. We looked for prospective or retrospective cohort studies to identify diagnostic or prognostic factors, but no relevant studies were found. Therefore we looked for observational studies that reported the prevalence of cystic fibrosis among people presenting with one of the symptoms of interest. As no diagnostic or prognostic data were finally included in the review, a GRADE approach (as specified in the protocol) was no longer deemed appropriate. Therefore for this review, the quality appraisal of the evidence has been conducted by study, and not by outcome. For full details of the protocol see Appendix D . 5.2.1. Respiratory symptoms Four observational studies were identified, 2 prospective ( Ooi 2012 , Seer 1997 ) and 2 retrospective (Hubert 2014, Grimaldi 2015 ). Sample sizes ranged from 72 to 601, and the studies were conducted in Canada ( Ooi 2012 , Seer 1997 ) and France (Hubert 2014, Grimaldi 2015 ). 5.2.2. Faltering growth No studies were identified. 5.2.3. Symptoms of malabsorption No studies were identified. 5.2.4. Azoospermia One observational study was identified ( Ooi 2012 ). Sample size was 92 and it was conducted in Canada. 5.2.5. Acute pancreatitis Two observational studies were identified ( Lucidi 2011 , Ooi 2012 ). Sample sizes ranged from 44 to 78, and the studies were conducted in Canada ( Ooi 2012 ) and Italy ( Lucidi 2011 ). 5.2.6. Meconium ileus No studies were identified. A summary of the included studies is presented in Table 19 . See also study selection flow chart in Appendix F , excluded studies list in Appendix H , and study evidence tables in Appendix G . Table 19 Summary of included studies and results. 5.3. Summary of included studies and results A summary of the studies that were included in this review and the results is presented in Table 19 . 5.4. Clinical evidence profile See summary of results in Table 19 . 5.5. Economic evidence This review question is not relevant for economic analysis because it does not involve a decision between alternative courses of action. No economic evaluations to identify the clinical manifestations suggestive of cystic fibrosis were identified in the literature search conducted for this guideline. Full details of the search and economic article selection flow chart can be found in Appendix E and F , respectively. 5.6. Evidence statements 5.6.1. Respiratory symptoms Very low quality evidence from 1 prospective observational study showed that among 81 children with a history >3 months of productive cough 1.23% (n=1) had a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (by means of sweat test, thresholds not reported). The study does not report whether these children had undergone newborn screening. Very low quality evidence from 1 retrospective observational study showed that among 502 infants and children (age range: 1 month to 10 years) who had a negative cystic fibrosis newborn screening presenting respiratory symptoms: 0.3% (n=1; N=358) of the children presenting with asthma had a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (sweat test ≥60 mmol/l) 1.5% (n=4; N=263) of the children presenting with a chronic cough had a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (sweat test ≥60 mmol/l) 1.8% (n=4; N=212) of the children presenting with lower airway infections had a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (sweat test ≥60 mmol/l) 5.7% (n=2; N=35) of the children presenting with bronchiectasis had a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (sweat test ≥60 mmol/l). Very low quality evidence from 1 retrospective observational study showed that among 601 adults (mean age: 31 years) referred for diffuse bronchiectasis: 6.16% (n=37) had confirmed diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (sweat test >60 mmol/l) 1.50% (n=9) had borderline diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (sweat test 40 to 60 mmol/l). The study does not report whether these people had undergone newborn screening, but seems unlikely as newborn screening was implemented in France in 2003. Very low quality evidence from 1 prospective observational study showed that among 72 children, young people and adults (mean age; range: 34.8 years; 9.9 to 66.7 years) with idiopathic chronic sinopulmonary disease: 19.4% (n=14) had a diagnosis of classic cystic fibrosis based on sweat test (European Consensus Recommendations) 4.2% (n=3) had a CFTR abnormality (based on extensive CFTR genotyping, and according to European Guidelines). This is also known as non-classic or atypical cystic fibrosis 1.4% (n=1) had an inconclusive diagnosis. The study does not report whether these people had undergone newborn screening. 5.6.2. Faltering growth No evidence was found for this sign. 5.6.3. Symptoms of malabsorption No evidence was found for this symptom. 5.6.4. Azoospermia Very low quality evidence from 1 prospective observational study showed that among 92 adult men (mean age; range: 34.8 years; 25.4 to 56.6 years) with infertility due to obstructive azoospermia: 20.7% (n=19) had a diagnosis of classic cystic fibrosis based on sweat test (European Consensus Recommendations) 22.8% (n=21) had a CFTR abnormality 9.8% (n=9) had an inconclusive diagnosis. The study does not report whether these men had undergone newborn screening. 5.6.5. Acute pancreatitis Very low quality from 1 retrospective observational study with 78 infants, children and young people (age range: 4 months to 18 years) affected by acute pancreatitis: 1.3% (n=1) had a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis based on sweat test (thresholds not reported) 9% (n=7) had a borderline diagnosis of cystic fibrosis based on sweat test (thresholds not reported); 39.6% had a single CFTR mutation on genetic testing n=1 had a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis based on the detection of 2 cystic fibrosis-causing mutations (the study included 78 children and young people, but it is unknown for how many of them genetic testing was available) The study does not report whether these people had undergone newborn screening. Very low quality evidence from 1 prospective observational study showed that among 44 children, young people and adults (mean age; range: 24.3 years; 7.9 to 59.9 years) with idiopathic recurrent, acute or chronic pancreatitis: 4.5% (n=2) had a diagnosis of classic cystic fibrosis based on sweat test (European Consensus Recommendations) 13.6% (n=6) had a CFTR abnormality 2.3% (n=1) had an inconclusive diagnosis. The study does not report whether these people had undergone newborn screening. 5.6.6. Meconium ileus No evidence was found for symptoms in infants. 5.6.7. Economic evidence statements No evidence on cost-effectiveness in people with cystic fibrosis was available for this review. 5.7. Evidence to recommendations The aim of this review was to support health care professionals in identifying cystic fibrosis even in people who have been through new-born screening. The committee chose clinical diagnosis of cystic fibrosis as a critical outcome for this evidence review. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, positive likelihood ratio and negative likelihood ratio were rated as important outcomes. 5.7.1. Consideration of clinical benefits and harms The committee agreed that a definition of cystic fibrosis was needed in order to emphasise that cystic fibrosis is a syndrome rather than a disease. There are a number of investigations (such as sweat test or genetic test) that can be done in the event that cystic fibrosis is suspected, but there is no gold standard as such. These tests are useful in confirming cystic fibrosis, but they cannot completely exclude it. Ultimately, in rare cases, the diagnosis can be made based on the clinical signs and symptoms alone, even if tests results are negative. The committee discussed the emotional implications of being diagnosed with cystic fibrosis with a negative sweat test and cystic fibrosis gene mutations that have been conclusively shown to be disease causing. The committee discussed the limitations of the available evidence. None of the studies reported diagnostic accuracy data. They agreed the usefulness of prevalence data reported in the studies was very limited as these studies did not adequately define the population and the analysis did not control for confounders. Due to this, they concluded it was not very useful in informing their recommendations and these were based on their clinical experience. The committee discussed the relevance of each sign and symptom included in the evidence review. The committee agreed that infants (children under 1 year of age), children and young people and adults, required separate recommendations depending on the pertinence of the symptoms for each subgroup. The committee noted that the presence of meconium ileus in infants was considered a highly suggestive sign of cystic fibrosis that should lead to further investigation. This is because meconium ileus is a unique feature of cystic fibrosis. Likewise, the suspected diagnosis of DIOS in children, young people and adults (which is the equivalent to meconium ileus in infants) is also a well-known factor suggestive of cystic fibrosis that should also lead to further investigations of cystic fibrosis. In relation to respiratory symptoms, the committee emphasised that one single respiratory event should not necessarily lead to further investigation. The committee considered recurrent lower respiratory tract infections, chronic lung disease or chest X-ray with persistent changes as reasons for referral in infants. Similarly, chronic sinus disease and chronic wet or productive cough should also be considered as reasons for referral in children, young people and adults. They noted that children do not produce sputum and agreed to use the term wet cough. In adults, they agreed it was more appropriate to use productive sputum instead of wet cough, as adults are more aware of having sputum. Finally, they noted the presence of chronic or repeated chest infection regardless of species may raise the possibility of cystic fibrosis. They agreed not to specify pathogens causing chest infection as people with cystic fibrosis may become colonised or chronically infected with many different opportunistic infections and so highlighting any individual species is likely to confuse diagnosis. The committee discussed that people with cystic fibrosis often show signs of bronchiectasis due to recurrent inflammation and infection. Additionally, people with cystic fibrosis may present with asthma-like symptoms, such as wheezing, coughing, chest tightness and shortness of breath due to inflammation and infection of the airways. The committee acknowledged that cystic fibrosis is known to cause pancreatitis. Approximately 10–15% of people with cystic fibrosis are exocrine pancreatic sufficient and so do not show malabsorption symptoms or diabetes mellitus, however, these patients do show a high incidence of attacks of pancreatitis. The committee agreed that cystic fibrosis can also be suspected if there are signs of faltering growth in infants and pre-school children or undernutrition in older children, young people and adults. They noted that in young people, undernutrition can lead to delayed puberty but agreed not to include it as a sign where cystic fibrosis should be considered as there are other reasons that can lead to delayed puberty. They noted that in adults with cystic fibrosis undernutrition normally goes in association with other symptoms, such as pancreatitis and malabsorption. The committee stressed that malabsorption should be separated from undernutrition as malabsorption, such as steatorrhea, may be indicative of pancreatic insufficiency, a common complication of cystic fibrosis (as discussed above), whereas undernutrition has a variety of non-cystic fibrosis causes. The committee highlighted that azoospermia showed an important association with a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis. They noted that this was consistent with previous findings, as it is estimated 99% of men with cystic fibrosis are infertile. They also noted that some men can produce sperm, but they are still infertile. They discussed whether this symptom applied to young people too, but agreed that generally it will not be apparent to people under 18 years. It was also discussed that women may present with sub-infertility, but agreed that this is rather unusual and that clinically it is not possible to use the term subinfertility. The committee also discussed other signs and symptoms not included in the review protocol, such as congenital intestinal atresia, DIOS, rectal prolapse, pseudo-Bartter syndrome and diabetes mellitus. The committee noted congenital intestinal atresia is a rare condition that leads to the complete occlusion of the intestinal lumen in neonates. It has been associated with the presence of cystic fibrosis. As highlighted in the protocol, DIOS is considered a symptom of cystic fibrosis. Therefore, the committee agreed that the suspected diagnosis of DIOS in children, young people and adults (which is the equivalent to meconium ileus in infants) should lead to further investigations of cystic fibrosis. They noted that rectal prolapse can be a sign that health care professionals should be aware of. However, this sign does not present on its own and it is associated with pancreatitis. Cystic fibrosis may present as Pseudo-Bartter Syndrome, dehydration and salt depletion due to dysregulation of salt homeostasis in cystic fibrosis. But this is rare in the UK and more common in warmer climates. They also discussed whether the presence of diabetes mellitus in young people could be a sign of cystic fibrosis. However, they agreed not to include it in the recommendations as cystic fibrosis-related diabetes is diagnosed in the presence of other symptoms related to cystic fibrosis. In addition to the signs and symptoms mentioned above, the committee noted that family history could also prompt an assessment for cystic fibrosis. The committee agreed that a sweat test should be recommended in infants, children and young people. If the test was positive or borderline, the person should be referred for further investigations at a specialist cystic fibrosis centre. Furthermore, the committee were concerned about carrying out genetic testing in a child carrier to determine their carrier status (for example if the child is heterozygous), as they cannot give consent. Thus, they agreed that genetic testing should only be considered when sweat tests results are uncertain. In adults, however, the sweat test is less reliable and cystic fibrosis gene testing is preferred. With regards to gene testing, the committee noted that over 2000 variants in the CFTR have been identified but at present only around 10% of these have been linked to the development of cystic fibrosis. At present genetic tests only return results for the most common variants associated with the disease. Clinicians should be aware this means results from genetic tests cannot rule out a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis. The committee discussed how the results of genetic testing results related to the obligation of clinicians to refer people to a specialist cystic fibrosis centre. They agreed that a gene test revealing 1 or more cystic fibrosis mutations was a reason for referral. It was also decided that due to the possibility that negative results do not entirely rule out cystic fibrosis, a referral should be based on the clinician’s judgement in light of gene test results and apparent symptoms (as discussed above). The committee noted that these recommendations are consistent with the NHS Service Specifications for cystic fibrosis. 5.7.2. Consideration of economic benefits and harms The committee advised that their recommendation to offer a sweat test or gene test follows current clinical practice to identify the clinical manifestations of cystic fibrosis and its complications. The committee also added that this was reflected in the Guidelines for the Performance of the Sweat Test for the Investigation of Cystic Fibrosis in the UK 2nd Version 2014. Overall, the committee agreed their recommendations promoted a cost-effective use of resources as those tests would subsequently inform the patient’s management which may potentially improve their health-related quality of life and outweigh the relatively cheap cost of those tests. Moreover, knowing what clinical manifestations suggest a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis and the complications of cystic fibrosis may lead to better identification. This may result in more timely management and therefore has potentially important resource implications, albeit indirectly. Therefore, it was important those manifestations and complications were included in the committee’s recommendations. 5.7.3. Quality of evidence Prospective and retrospective observational studies were included in the review. The quality of evidence as assessed per individual studies was very low. The main sources of bias in the studies were: Selection bias: It was noted that most studies do not indicate whether children had undergone newborn screening. Although committee members were able to assume that in some of the studies it was likely the participants were not assessed based on the date of the study and the country ( Hubert 2004 - France). Prognostic factor of interest or outcome of interest not defined: It was noted that some studies did not adequately define the symptom evaluated. Other studies did not provide details about how sweat test was conducted or the thresholds used for diagnosis. Lack of control of potential confounders: Studies did not indicate if the people included in the studies presented with other sign or symptoms suggestive of cystic fibrosis. This was considered a very serious limitation. Due to all these limitations, the committee considered that the usefulness of prevalence data reported in the studies is very limited. None of the studies reported diagnostic accuracy data or enough data to calculate diagnostic outcomes. 5.7.4. Other considerations No equality issues were identified by the committee for this review question. The committee agreed there was no need to prioritise a research recommendation for this topic. They noted that a universal screening programme is in place in the UK since 2006. In addition, they agreed their clinical experience and expertise was sufficient to draft recommendations regarding the clinical features that should lead to investigation of cystic fibrosis. The committee noted that there are useful publications on diagnosing cystic fibrosis that health care professionals can refer to, such as the Guidelines for the Performance of the Sweat Test for the Investigation of Cystic Fibrosis in the UK, 2 nd Version, by the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (2014) ; and the supporting publications by Public Health England (2012) on the newborn blood spot screening programme in relation to cystic fibrosis, which are available online. 5.7.5. Key conclusions The committee concluded that cystic fibrosis is a clinical syndrome that is diagnosed based on clinical presentation. This diagnosis can be confirmed by sweat test and a genetic test. In infants, children, young people and adults that have not been previously diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, including those who had a negative newborn screening test, cystic fibrosis can be suspected based on family history or if one or more of the following signs or symptoms are present: meconium ileus or DIOS, respiratory symptoms, pancreatitis, faltering growth or malnutrition, symptoms of malabsorption, rectal prolapse or pseudo-Bartter syndrome. 5.8. Recommendations 1. Be aware that cystic fibrosis can be diagnosed based on: positive test results in people with no symptoms, for example infant screening (blood spot immunoreactive trypsin test) followed by sweat and gene tests for confirmation or clinical manifestations, supported by sweat or gene test results for confirmation or clinical manifestations alone, in the rare case of people with symptoms who have normal sweat or gene test results. 2. Assess for cystic fibrosis and, when clinically appropriate, perform a sweat test (for children and young people) or a cystic fibrosis gene test (for adults) in people with any of the following: family history congenital intestinal atresia meconium ileus symptoms and signs that suggest distal intestinal obstruction syndrome faltering growth (in infants and young children) undernutrition recurrent and chronic pulmonary disease, such as: recurrent lower respiratory tract infections clinical or radiological evidence of lung disease (in particular bronchiectasis) persistent chest X-ray changes chronic wet or productive cough chronic sinus disease obstructive azoospermia (in young people and adults) acute or chronic pancreatitis malabsorption rectal prolapse (in children) pseudo-Bartter syndrome. 3. Refer people with suspected cystic fibrosis to a specialist cystic fibrosis centre if: they have a positive or equivocal sweat test result their assessment suggests they have cystic fibrosis but their test results are normal gene testing reveals 1 or more cystic fibrosis mutations. Publication Details Copyright Copyright © NICE 2017. Publisher National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) , London NLM Citation National Guideline Alliance (UK). Cystic Fibrosis: Diagnosis and management. London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE); 2017 Oct 25. (NICE Guideline, No. 78.) 5, Diagnosis of cystic fibrosis. Prev Next Table 19 Summary of included studies and results View in own window Study Clinical symptoms & signs and reference test Population Findings Comments Quality Respiratory symptoms Hubert 2004 (France) Retrospective, observational study Symptom: bronchiectasis Bronchiectasis defined as chronic mucopurulent sputum production and recurrent lower respiratory tract infection, were confirmed by high-resolution CT. Reference test: sweat chloride test (ST) Thresholds: Diagnosis of CF: >60 mmol/l. Suggestive, but not diagnostic of CF: 40 to 60 mmol/l. N=601 Adults referred for diffuse bronchiectasis from 1992 to 2001 Mean age (range): 31 years (18 to 56) Clinical diagnosis of CF Confirmed CF diagnosis: n=37; 6.16% Borderline CF diagnosis: n=9; 1.50% Sensitivity, specificity, LR+, LR-, PPV and NPV not reported and not calculable. It is unknown whether these patients underwent newborn screening, but seems unlikely as newborn screening was implemented in France in 2002 ( Grimaldi 2015 ) Two sweat test were performed for each patient. Critical confounders not taken into consideration. Very low Grimaldi 2015 (France) Retrospective, observational, multicentre study Symptoms: asthma, chronic cough, lower airway infections, bronchiectasis Definition for symptoms not provided. Reference test: sweat chloride test (ST) Thresholds for patients >6 months: Positive ST: ≥60 mmol/l. Intermediate ST: 40 to 59 mmol/l. Negative ST: ≤39 mmol/l. Thresholds for infants up to 6 months: Positive ST: ≥60 mmol/l. Intermediate ST: 29 to 59 mmol/l. Negative ST: ≤29 mmol/l. N=502 Infants and children who had a negative CF newborn screening presenting respiratory symptoms Mean age ± SD (range): 36±28 months (1 month to 10 years) Asthma: n=358 Chronic cough: n=263 Lower airway infections: n=212 Bronchiectasis: n=35 Clinical diagnosis of CF In children with asthma: n=1; 0.3% In children with chronic cough: n=4; 1.5% In children with lower airway infections: n=4; 1.8% In children with bronchiectasis: n=2; 5.7% Sensitivity, specificity, LR+, LR-, PPV and NPV not reported and not calculable. All children had a negative CF newborn screening. Critical confounders not taken into consideration. Very low Ooi 2012 (Canada) Prospective, observational study Symptom: Idiopathic chronic sinopulmonary disease Idiopathic sinopulmonary disease defined as recurrent or chronic sinusitis (including sinusoidal pain, nasal discharge, postnasal drip), nasal polyps, recurrent or chronic bronchitis, recurrent pneumonia and/or bronchiectasis for at least 6 months. All enrolled subjects with sinopulmonary disease had three or more of these symptoms. Reference test: sweat chloride test (ST) cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) ST thresholds for the diagnosis of CF according to European consensus recommendations. Extensive CFTR genotyping according to European diagnostic process (interpretation of results from genotyping was based on the number of mutations identified). N=72 Undiagnosed individuals with single organ manifestations of CF were enrolled between 1994 and 2008 Mean age ± SD (range): 38.5±15.9 (9.9 to 66.7) years Clinical diagnosis of CF Classic CF: n=14; 19.4% CFTR dysfunction: n=3; 4.2% Inconclusive: n=1; 1.4% Unlikely diagnosis: n=54; 75.0% Sensitivity, specificity, LR+, LR-, PPV and NPV not reported and not calculable. It is unknown whether these patients underwent newborn screening, Critical confounders not taken into consideration. Very low Seear 1997 (Canada) Prospective, observational study Symptom: Chronic cough No definition given. But just children with a history of >3 months of productive cough, of unknown cause, were included Reference test: sweat chloride test (ST) Thresholds for diagnosis of CF not reported. N=81 Children with a history of >3 months of productive cough Age: not reported Clinical diagnosis of CF Diagnosis of CF: n=1; 1.23% Sensitivity, specificity, LR+, LR-, PPV and NPV not reported and not calculable. It is unknown whether these patients underwent newborn screening, Critical confounders not taken into consideration. Very low Faltering growth No studies were identified. Symptoms of malabsorption No studies were identified. Azoospermia Ooi 2012 (Canada) Prospective, observational study Symptom: Infertility due to obstructive azoospermia A diagnosis of obstructive azoospermia (congenital unilateral or bilateral absence of vas deferens) was confirmed by physical examination, transrectal ultrasound and evidence of azoospermia on two separate occasions. Reference test: sweat chloride test (ST) cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) ST thresholds for the diagnosis of CF according to European consensus recommendations. Extensive CFTR genotyping according to European diagnostic process (interpretation of results from genotyping was based on the number of mutations identified). N=92 Undiagnosed individuals with single organ manifestations of CF were enrolled between 1994 and 2008 Mean age ± SD (range): 34.8±5.3 (25.4 to 56.6) years Clinical diagnosis of CF Classic CF: n=19; 20.7% CFTR dysfunction: n=21; 22.8% Inconclusive: n=9; 9.8% Unlikely diagnosis: n=43; 46.7% Sensitivity, specificity, LR+, LR-, PPV and NPV not reported and not calculable. It is unknown whether these patients underwent newborn screening, Critical confounders not taken into consideration. Very low Acute pancreatitis Lucidi 2011 (Italy) Retrospective, observational study Symptom: acute recurrent pancreatitis Acute recurrent pancreatitis defined as 2 or more separate documented episodes of acute pancreatitis with serum amylase and/or lipase levels at least 3 times the upper reference limit Reference tests: sweat chloride test (ST), genetic test (CFTR mutation) ST thresholds for diagnosis of CF not reported. CFTR genotyping diagnostic process not reported. N=78 Paediatric population affected by acute recurrent pancreatitis between 2003 and 2008 Mean age ± SD (range): 8.8±5.1 years (4 months to 18 years) Clinical diagnosis of CF Diagnosis of CF with ST: n=1; 1.3% Borderline diagnosis of CF with ST: n=7; 9% Diagnosis of CF by the detection of 2 CF-causing mutations: n=1 (percentage cannot be calculated as the study does not report for how many people there was data available) CFTR mutation: 39.6% (data available for n=53) Sensitivity, specificity, LR+, LR-, PPV and NPV not reported and not calculable. 42.3% (n=33) patients had a positive family history of chronic pancreatitis/cystic fibrosis and/or positive genetic testing and/or altered sweat test. However it is unknown whether all these patients underwent newborn screening. Critical confounders not taken into consideration. Very low Ooi 2012 (Canada) Prospective, observational study Symptom: Idiopathic recurrent, acute or chronic pancreatitis A diagnosis of idiopathic recurrent acute pancreatitis was accepted following at least two episodes of abdominal pain associated with raised serum amylase and/or lipase (more than two times the upper limit of the reference range), and/or imaging evidence of acute pancreatitis such as pancreatic oedema, haemorrhage or necrosis. Patients with chronic pancreatitis had chronic pain in association with pancreatic calcifications and/or characteristic ductal changes. Reference test: sweat chloride test (ST) cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) ST thresholds for the diagnosis of CF according to European consensus recommendations. Extensive CFTR genotyping according to European diagnostic process (interpretation of results from genotyping was based on the number of mutations identified). N=44 Undiagnosed individuals with single organ manifestations of CF were enrolled between 1994 and 2008 Mean age ± SD (range): 24.3±13.2 (7.9 to 59.9) years Clinical diagnosis of CF Classic CF: n=2; 4.5% CFTR dysfunction: n=6; 13.6% Inconclusive: n=1; 2.3% Unlikely diagnosis: n=35; 79.6% Sensitivity, specificity, LR+, LR-, PPV and NPV not reported and not calculable. It is unknown whether these patients underwent newborn screening, Critical confounders not taken into consideration. Very low Meconium ileus No studies were identified Abbreviations: CF: cystic fibrosis; CFTR: CF transmembrane conductance regulator; LR: likelihood ratio; NPV: negative predictive value; PPV: positive predictive value; SDS: standardized by age and gender; ST: sweat test