REVIEW
The abuse of diuretics as performance-enhancing
drugs and masking agents in sport doping:
pharmacology, toxicology and analysis
bph_789 1..16
Amy B Cadwallader1, Xavier de la Torre 1, Alessandra Tieri1 and Francesco Botrè1,2
1Laboratorio Antidoping, Federazione Medico Sportiva Italiana, Largo Giulio Onesti, 1, Rome, Italy, and 2 Dipartimento di
Management e Tecnologie, ‘Sapienza’ Università di Roma, Via del Castro Laurenziano 9, Rome, Italy
Diuretics are drugs that increase the rate of urine ﬂow and sodium excretion to adjust the volume and composition of body
ﬂuids. There are several major categories of this drug class and the compounds vary greatly in structure, physicochemical
properties, effects on urinary composition and renal haemodynamics, and site and mechanism of action. Diuretics are often
abused by athletes to excrete water for rapid weight loss and to mask the presence of other banned substances. Because of their
abuse by athletes, diuretics have been included on The World Anti-Doping Agency’s (WADA) list of prohibited substances; the
use of diuretics is banned both in competition and out of competition and diuretics are routinely screened for by anti-doping
laboratories. This review provides an overview of the pharmacology and toxicology of diuretics and discusses their application
in sports. The most common analytical strategies currently followed by the anti-doping laboratories accredited by the WADA
are discussed along with the challenges laboratories face for the analysis of this diverse class of drugs.
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161, 1–16; doi:10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00789.x
BJP has previously published a themed issue on Drugs in Sport (2008). To view this issue visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bph.2008.154.issue-3
Keywords: diuretics; masking agents; doping analysis; GC/MS, LC/MS-MS
Abbreviations: AMS, high-altitude mountain sickness; CA, carbonic anhydrase; GC, gas chromatography; GFR, glomerular
ﬁltration rate; HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; IOC, International Olympic Committee; ISRP,
internal surface reversed-phase; L/L, liquid/liquid; LC, liquid chromatography; MR, mineralocorticoid receptor;
MRPL, minimum required performance levels; MS, mass spectrometry; PRA, plasma renin activity; SPE, solid
phase extraction; UV-DAD, ultraviolet-diode array detection; VO
2, oxygen uptake; WADA, World Anti-Doping
Agency
Introduction
For as long as sporting events have existed, the desire to gain
a competitive edge has been present as well. With the huge
ﬁnancial incentives and the subsequent pressures to excel
associated with the international sporting industry, attempts
to achieve a competitive edge especially with the use of
performance-enhancing drugs have only been increasing
(Barroso et al., 2008). Despite centuries of reports of using
substances to enhance athletic performance, testing athletes
for the use of performance-enhancing drugs began only in
1968 (Barroso et al., 2008; Botrè, 2008). Since that time, a list
of banned substances has been constantly updated by the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the World Anti-
doping Agency (WADA). Compounds and methods included
on the list are those that can be used by an athlete to provide
an unfair advantage (WADA, 2009b). Substances on the Pro-
hibited List include anabolic androgenic steroids, glucocorti-
costeroids, peptide hormones and their modulators, hormone
antagonists and their modulators, stimulants, b2-agonists,
narcotics, alcohol, b-blockers, cannabinoids and diuretics and
masking agents (WADA, 2009b). The objective of this paper is
to review the pharmacology of diuretics and the applications
of diuretics to sports doping, as well as detail the analytical
methodologies currently described to detect and identify
diuretics in urine. All the classes of diuretics (detailed later in
this paper) are banned in sport.
Diuretics are therapeutic agents that are used to increase the
rate of urine ﬂow and sodium excretion in order to adjust the
volume and composition of body ﬂuids or to eliminate excess
of ﬂuids from tissues (Jackson, 2006). They are used in clinical
therapy for the treatment of various diseases and syndromes,
Correspondence: Professor Francesco Botrè, Laboratorio Antidoping FMSI,
Largo Giulio Onesti, 1, 00197 Rome RM, Italy. E-mail: francesco.botre@
uniroma1.it
Received 11 December 2009; revised 29 January 2010; accepted 19 February
2010
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010), 161, 1–16
© 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2010 The British Pharmacological Society All rights reserved 0007-1188/10
www.brjpharmacol.org

including hypertension, heart failure, liver cirrhosis, renal
failure, kidney and lung diseases, as well as a more general
reduction of the adverse effects of salts and/or water retention
(Jackson, 2006). Diuretics were ﬁrst banned in sport (both in
competition and out of competition) in 1988 because they
can be used by athletes for two primary reasons. First, their
potent ability to remove water from the body can cause a
rapid weight loss that can be required to meet a weight cat-
egory in sporting events. Second, they can be used to mask
the administration of other doping agents by reducing their
concentration in urine primarily because of an increase in
urine volume. The urine dilution effect of diuretics also allows
them to be classiﬁed as masking agents and precludes their
use both in and out of competition. Some diuretics also cause
a masking effect by altering the urinary pH and inhibiting the
passive excretion of acidic and basic drugs in urine (Ventura
and Segura, 1996; Goebel et al., 2004; Trout and Kazlauskas,
2004; Furlanello et al., 2007).
In 2008, diuretics represented 7.9% of all Adverse Analytical
Findings reported by WADA laboratories, with a total number
of 436 cases (WADA, 2009a). All classes of diuretics were
represented in the positive cases; hydrochlorothiazide was the
most common diuretic detected, with 137 cases. Table 1 sum-
marizes the statistics of positive diuretic ﬁndings by all WADA
laboratories from 2003 to the present. In all six of the past
years, all classes of diuretics have been represented in the
positive ﬁndings (WADA, 2004; 2005; 2006; 2007; 2008a;
2009a). Over the years, the total number of occurrences has
been increasing; this trend of increasing positive ﬁndings may
be due not only to an increase in abuse, but is likely due to
improved methods of detection.
Although the main application of diuretics is to enhance
renal excretion of salt and water, their effects are not limited
to sodium and chloride; they may also inﬂuence the renal
absorption and excretion of other cations (K
+,H +,C a 2+ and
Mg2+), anions (Cl-, HCO3
- and H2PO4
-) and uric acid (Jackson,
2006). This pharmacological class of drugs includes com-
pounds with a variety of pharmacological and physico-
chemical properties. Because of the variety of diuretic
compounds, classiﬁcation of these drugs can be based on
different criteria. The most common classiﬁcation categories
are by site of action in the nephron, relative efﬁcacy, chemi-
cal structure, effects on potassium excretion, similarity to
other diuretics and mechanism of action (Jackson, 2006). In
the following section, this review will brieﬂy summarize the
pharmacology and toxicology of diuretic classes based on
mechanism of action. Figure 1 shows examples of diuretic
structures grouped by mechanism of action: carbonic anhy-
drase (CA) inhibitors, inhibitors of the Na
+/K+/2Cl- symporter
(loop diuretics), inhibitors of the Na +/Cl- symporter (thiazide
and thiazide-like diuretics), osmotic diuretics, inhibitors of
renal epithelial Na
+ channels (some potassium-sparing
diuretics) and mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) antagonists;
note the variety of molecular structures. Figure 2 details the
site and mechanism of the diuretic classes in the nephron
(Figure 2A).
The identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of prohibited com-
pounds and/or their metabolic products has been a major task
in sports drug testing (Cowan and Kicman, 1997). Histori-
cally, the detection of diuretics in biological samples was
achieved using high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) with ultraviolet-diode array detection (UV-DAD).
However, the HPLC-DAD detection technique is not speciﬁc
for the unequivocal identiﬁcation of substances. Therefore,
mass spectral methodology is required for conﬁrmation
according to international anti-doping regulations (Trout and
Kazlauskas, 2004; Thevis and Schanzer, 2007; WADA, 2009c).
Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) after
appropriate sample preparation and derivatization has been,
since the last decade, the most widely used analytical tech-
nique for the detection of diuretics. Recently however, due to
the heterogeneity of the chemical structures and physico-
chemical properties of diuretics and the advent of
more economical instrumentation, the use of liquid
chromatography/MS (LC/MS) has become popular (Thevis
and Schanzer, 2007). The sample preparation before LC/MS
analysis is simpler than with GC/MS and no derivatization is
required. Ventura and Segura published a comprehensive
review of diuretic analysis in 1996 (Ventura and Segura,
1996). This review will mainly focus on the developments and
techniques that have been developed since that time. This
article is an extension of the British Journal of Pharmacology
special themed issue, Drugs in Sport (McGrath and Cowan,
2008).
Pharmacology and toxicology of diuretics
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (Figure 1A) by deﬁnition are a
class of substances that act as inhibitors of CA (carbonate
dehydratase, carbonate hydrolase, E.C.4.2.1.1) in proximal
tubule cells of the nephron (Figure 2B). CA is a zinc metal-
loenzyme expressed in humans as a family of at least 15
Table 1 Statistics of positive ﬁndings of diuretics by all World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) laboratories (WADA, 2004; 2005; 2006; 2007;
2008a; 2009a)
Year % of all positive samples Occurrences Most common drug detected
(occurrences)
Second most common drug
detected (occurrences)
2003 5.2 142 Furosemide (48) Hydrochlorothiazide (42)
2004 4.8 157 Furosemide (62) Hydrochlorothiazide (44)
2005 5.7 246 Furosemide (91) Hydrochlorothiazide (67)
2006 6.7 290 Furosemide (90) Hydrochlorothiazide (88)
2007 7.4 359 Furosemide (111) Hydrochlorothiazide (103)
2008 7.9 436 Hydrochlorothiazide (137) Furosemide (104)
Diuretics in sport doping
2 AB Cadwallader et al
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

isoenzymes (Tashian, 2000), four of them (CA II, CA IV , CA
XII and CA XIV) are present in the kidney (Schwartz, 2002).
Type II CA, the most potent isoenzyme, represents 95% of
total CA in the kidney and it is found as a soluble protein in
the cytoplasm. Type IV CA, a membrane-bound isoenzyme, is
found in the luminal and basolateral membranes. This
enzyme plays a key role in bicarbonate reabsorption and acid
secretion in the nephron by reversibly catalysing the hydra-
tion reaction of CO
2 with the production of H+ and bicarbon-
ate ions. Both CA II and CA IV are inhibited by
B Inhibitors of the Na +/K+/2Cl- Symporter (Loop and High-ceiling Diuretics)
Furosemide               Bumetanide           Ethacrynic acid 
Torsemide        Azosemide 
Piretanide            Tripamide 
Cl NH
S
O
OH
O
O
O
H2N
S
OH
O
O
O
H2N
O
HN
ClCl
O
OH
O
O
N
N
H SO
O
NH
NH
O
Cl NH
S
S
O
O
H2N
HN N
N
N
S
OH
O
O
O
H2N
O
N
Cl
S
O
O
H2N HN
O
N
A Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
          
Acetazolamide                  Dichlorphenamide                         Methazolamide 
N N
S
SN
O
O
NH2
C
O
H3C
H3C
N N
S SHN
O
O
NH2
C
O
H3C
Cl
Cl
SS
H2N
O
O
O
O
NH2
Figure 1 Examples of diuretic structures grouped by mechanism of action. (A) Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors; (B) inhibitors of the Na +/K+/2Cl-
symporter (loop diuretics); (C) inhibitors of the Na +/Cl- symporter (thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics); (D) osmotic diuretics; (E) inhibitors of
renal epithelial Na + channels (some potassium-sparing diuretics); (F) mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) antagonists (aldosterone antagonists and
some potassium-sparing diuretics).
Diuretics in sport doping
AB Cadwallader et al
3
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

sulphonamides, and especially by aromatic sulphonamides
with the unsubstituted -SO2NH2 functional group. The
reduced capacity to exchange Na + with H+ in the presence of
these diuretics determines weak diuretic action. In addition,
bicarbonate is kept in the lumen with the consequent increase
of urinary pH to approximately 8 and subsequential develop-
ment of a metabolic acidosis. Phosphate excretion is also
increased by a mechanism not fully clariﬁed. Ca
2+ and Mg2+
excretion is not affected.
Currently, there are three main CA inhibitors available as
diuretics (see Figure 1A for structures), acetazolamide (the
prototype of the class, a sulphonamide without antibacterial
activity), dichlorphenamide and methazolamide. They all
show an oral bioavailability of 100% with a half-life of 6–14 h.
Acetazolamide and dichlorphenamide are excreted by the
kidneys as intact drugs while methazolamide is extensively
metabolized. The major therapeutic indication of CA inhibi-
tors is open-angle glaucoma. Acetazolamide is often used for
the prevention of high-altitude mountain sickness (AMS), a
pathological effect of high altitude on the body caused by
acute exposure to low partial pressure of oxygen at high
altitude that can progress to high-altitude oedema
C Inhibitors of the Na +/Cl- Symporter (Thiazide and Thiazide-like Diuretics)
Compound R 1 R 2 R 3
Bendroflumethiazide CF3 H
Cl H HChlorothiazide 
*unsaturated between C3 and C4 
Hydrochlorothiazide Cl H H
Hydroflumethiazide CF3 HH
Methyclothiazide Cl CH 3 CH2Cl
Polythiazide Cl CH 3 C2SCH2CF3
Trichlormethiazide Cl H CHCl 2
  Chlorthalidone            Indapamide 
Metolazone         Quinethazone 
R1
S
O
O
H2N
S
N
H
N
R2
OO
R3
CH2
S
O
O
H2N
Cl
N
H
O
N
Cl
S
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
O
Cl
S
O
O
H2N
NH
H
N
O
HN
O
OH
S
O
O
H2N
Cl
Figure 1 Continued.
Diuretics in sport doping
4 AB Cadwallader et al
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

D Osmotic diuretics
Glycerin                  Isosorbide     Mannitol                Urea 
E Inhibitors of Renal Epithelial Na + Channels (Some Potassium-sparing Diuretics)
Amiloride              Triamterene 
OH
OH
HO
O
O
HO
H
H
H
H HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
H2N NH2
O
N
N C
NH2
Cl
H2N
N
O
C
H
NH2
NH
N
N
N
NH2N NH2
NH2
F Mineralocorticoid Receptor (MR) Antagonists (Aldosterone Antagonists and Some 
Potassium-sparing Diuretics)
Spironolactone         Canrenone 
Potassium Canrenoate      Eplerenone 
O S
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
OK
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Figure 1 Continued.
Diuretics in sport doping
AB Cadwallader et al 5
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

(pulmonary and cerebral). (Coote, 1991; Botrè and Botrè,
1993). Acetazolamide increases bicarbonate excretion in
urine, making the blood more acidic and increasing ventila-
tion, thus aiding in acclimatization to high altitude. Aceta-
zolamide is also used for the treatment of oedema. CA
inhibitors may also be used therapeutically for the treatment
of pre-menstrual ﬂuid retention.
Carbonic anhydrase is present in a number of extrarenal
tissues, including the eye, gastric mucosa, pancreas, central
nervous system and erythrocytes. Because of the varied loca-
tion around the body, CA inhibitors are typically used for
non-diuretic indications, such as glaucoma, to decrease the
rate of formation of aqueous humour and consequently
reduce intraocular pressure. It has been demonstrated that
topical administration of dorzolamide, a CA inhibitor abol-
ishing the enzymatic activity in the ciliary body, does not
produce any diuretic effect (Mazzarino et al., 2001). CA
inhibitors are also used as antiepileptic drugs due in part to
the production of metabolic acidosis.
Most adverse effects, contraindications and drug interac-
tions are a consequence of urinary alkalinization or meta-
bolic acidosis. Infrequent adverse effects are similar to those
of sulphonamides. The diversion of ammonia of renal origin
from urine into the systemic circulation, calculus formation
and ureteral colic causing precipitation of calcium phos-
phate salts in alkaline urine, worsening of metabolic or res-
piratory acidosis and reduction of the urinary excretion
rate of weak organic bases are also adverse effects of CA
inhibitors.
The efﬁcacy of CA inhibitors as single agents is low and the
long-term usefulness of CA inhibitors is often compromised
by the development of compensatory processes such as meta-
bolic acidosis. Additionally, the continuous use of CA inhibi-
tors may result in the diminution of the desired therapeutic
effect. Acetazolamide accounted for 1.4% of the positive
diuretic ﬁndings in 2008 (WADA, 2009a).
Inhibitors of the Na
+/K+/2Cl- symporter (loop diuretics)
Inhibitors of the Na +/K+/2Cl- symporter (Figure 1B) are a
highly potent short-acting diuretic class that bind to the
Cl
- binding site located in the transmembrane domain of
Figure 2 Site and mechanism of action of diuretics. (A) The nephron with major divisions labelled. (B) Mechanism of carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors in the proximal tubule. (C) Mechanism of the Na +/K+/2Cl- symporter inhibitors in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. (D)
Mechanism of the Na +/Cl- symporter inhibitors in the distal tubule. (E) Mechanism of renal epithelial Na + channel inhibitors and mineralo-
corticoid receptor antagonists in the collecting duct. Aldo, aldosterone; CA, carbonic anhydrase; MR, mineralocorticoid receptor. Figure
modiﬁed from Jackson (2006).
Diuretics in sport doping
6 AB Cadwallader et al
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

Na+/K+/2Cl- symporter, which is found in the thick ascend-
ing limb of the loop of Henle (Figure 2C). Blocking the func-
tion of this symporter results in a signiﬁcant reduction in
the ability of the kidney to concentrate urine and a conse-
quent signiﬁcant increase in the urinary excretion of Na
+
and Cl -. There is also a marked increase in the excretion of
Ca2+,M g2+ and K +. Uric acid excretion is also increased with
acute administration while chronic administration has the
converse effect.
Inhibitors of the Na
+/K+/2Cl- symporter are furosemide,
bumetanide, ethacrynic acid, torsemide, axosemide, piret-
anide and tripamide (structures pictured in Figure 1B).
Greater than 90% of drug binds to plasma proteins. They are
quickly and widely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
(65–90%) but have a very short half-life (less than 1 h for
bumetanide and piretanide and a maximum of 3.5 h for
torsemide). These symport inhibitors undergo partial metabo-
lism (hepatic for bumetanide and torsemide, renal glucurona-
tion for the others) with renal excretion as intact drugs
(Shankar and Brater, 2003).
Because of their sulphonamide-based structure, some loop
diuretics have weak CA-inhibiting activity that further
increases the diuretic effect of these drugs. Moreover, they
have direct vascular effects (Dormanset al., 1996) that acutely
increase systemic venous capacitance and decreases left ven-
tricular ﬁlling pressure. This effect, particularly evident for
furosemide, beneﬁts patients with pulmonary oedema even
before diuresis ensues.
A major indication of loop diuretics is in the treatment of
acute pulmonary oedema. They are also used for the treat-
ment of chronic congestive heart failure. This leads to a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in mortality, a decrease in the risk of
worsening heart failure and an improvement in exercise
capacity (Faris et al., 2002). Loop diuretics are also widely used
for the treatment of hypertension (van der Heijden et al.,
1998). Inhibitors of the Na
+/K+/2Cl- symporter are also indi-
cated in the treatment of oedema and ascites of liver cirrhosis,
in the treatment of the oedema of nephrotic syndrome and
for life-threatening hyponatremia.
Adverse effects are all correlated to ﬂuid and electrolyte
imbalance. They include hyponatremia and/or extracellular
ﬂuid volume depletion (associated with hypotension, circu-
latory collapse and thromboembolic episodes), hypochlo-
remic alkalosis, hypokalemia (which induces cardiac
arrhythmias), hypomagnesemia, hyperuricemia (occasion-
ally leading to gout) and hyperglycaemia. Furthermore, they
increase plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
and triglycerides while decreasing plasma levels of high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol. Loop diuretics can cause
ototoxicity, especially ethacrynic acid. This class of diuretics
has drug–drug interactions with several substances including
aminoglycosides, anticoagulants, digitalis glycosides,
lithium, propranolol, sulphonylureas, cisplatin, probenecid
and amphotericin B. The synergism of diuretic activity of
associated loop and thiazide diuretics leads to profound
diuresis.
In 2008, inhibitors of the Na
+/K+/2Cl- symporter accounted
for 24.6% of positive diuretic doping samples. Furosemide
was the second most frequently detected diuretic with 104
samples testing positive (23.9%) (WADA, 2009a).
Inhibitors of the Na
+/Cl- symporter (thiazide and
thiazide-like dugs)
Inhibitors of the Na
+/Cl- symporter (Figure 1C) have optimal
diuretic action in the early distal convoluted tubule and a
lesser diuretic effect in the proximal tubule. In addition, some
thiazide diuretics also are weak inhibitors of CA. They reduce
the Na
+ reabsorbtion by inhibition of Na+/Cl- co-transportion
(Figure 2D). Na + or Cl - binding to the Na +/Cl- symporter
modiﬁes thiazide-induced inhibition of the symporter, sug-
gesting that the thiazide-binding site is shared or altered by
both Na
+ and Cl- (Monroy et al., 2000).
Some examples of the drugs included in this class are the
following (see the structure in Figure 1C): bendroﬂumetazide,
chlorothiazide, hydrochlorothiazide, hydroﬂumethiazide,
methyclothiazide, polythiazide, trichlormethiazide, chlortali-
done, indapamide, metolazone and quinethazone. In general,
all of them show good bioavailability after oral administra-
tion (100% for bendroﬂumetazide and polythiazide, at least
50% for hydroﬂumethiazide and the others). They are par-
tially metabolized by unknown pathways and are partially
excreted as intact drugs by the kidney. Plasma protein binding
varies considerably among the class. The wide ranges of half-
lives vary from 1.5 h for chlorothiazide to almost 50 h for
chlortalidone.
Although this class of diuretic is expected to greatly
enhance Na
+ and Cl - excretion, this effect is moderate as
approximately 90% of the ﬁltered Na + is reabsorbed before
reaching the distal convoluted tubule. As with loop diuretics,
inhibitors of the Na
+/Cl- symporter affect K + and uric acid
excretion by the same mechanisms; K + excretion is markedly
increased after administration and uric acid excretion is
increased after acute administration and decreases after
chronic administration. They, however, decrease Ca
2+ excre-
tion (Friedman and Bushinsky, 1999).
Thiazide diuretics are the most widely used diuretics. They
are employed as a ﬁrst-line therapy for hypertension either
alone or in combination with other antihypertensive medi-
cations (Chobanian et al., 2003). They are also used for the
treatment of oedema associated with heart, liver and renal
diseases. Thiazide diuretics are frequently used because of
their low cost, high tolerance, good compliance (once daily
administration), few contraindications, efﬁcacy comparable
to other classes of antihypertensive agents and proven
beneﬁts in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality.
Again, similar to loop diuretics, most adverse effects of
Na
+/Cl- symport inhibitors are due to abnormalities of ﬂuid
and electrolyte balance and include: extracellular volume
depletion, hypotension, hypokalemia (which compromises
the antihypertensive effect), hyponatremia, hypochloremia,
metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, hypercalcemia, hype-
ruricemia and hyperglycaemia (latent diabetes mellitus may
be unmasked during therapy) (Wilcox et al., 1999). However,
unlike loop diuretics, Na
+/Cl- symport inhibitors increase
plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, total
cholesterol and total triglycerides and the incidence of erectile
dysfunction is greater.
Thiazide and thiazide-like diuretic drug–drug interactions
cause a diminished effect of anticoagulants, uricosuric agents,
sulphonylureas and insulin and increase the effects due to
Diuretics in sport doping
AB Cadwallader et al 7
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

synergism of action between anaesthetics, diazoxide, digitalis
glycosides, lithium, vitamin D and loop diuretics.
Inhibitors of the Na +/Cl- symporter were the most abused
class of diuretics in 2008 according to WADA statistics,
accounting for 38.7% of positive samples. Hydrochlorothiaz-
ide was the most detected diuretic, found in 31.4% (137) of
positive samples (WADA, 2009a).
Osmotic diuretics
Osmotic diuretics are a class of non-metabolizable low-
molecular-weight compounds. Only four compounds are
included in this diuretic class, glycerin, isosorbide, mannitol
and urea. The molecular structures are shown in Figure 1D.
These compounds are relatively pharmacologically inert,
freely ﬁlterable by the glomerulus and non-diffusible across
the nephron. They are administered in large doses, not only
orally (glycerine, isosorbide) but also intravenously (manni-
tol, urea). Such administration signiﬁcantly enhances the
osmolality of plasma and tubular ﬂuid and, in turn, causes an
increase of urine osmolality with consequent reduction of
water reabsorption in the distal nephron/collecting ducts.
Osmotic diuretics act both in the proximal tubule and the
loop of Henle, with the latter being the primary site of action.
These diuretics also work via an osmotic effect in the tubules
and by reducing medullary tonicity. The half-lives range from
less than 1 h in the case of glycerin and mannitol to almost
10 h for isosorbide.
By extracting water from intracellular compartments,
osmotic diuretics expand the extracellular ﬂuid volume,
decrease blood viscosity and inhibit renin release. This results
in an increase of the urinary excretion of all electrolytes, Na
+,
K+,C a2+,M g2+,C l -, HCO3
- and PO4
3-. Their use is limited to
well-deﬁned clinical situations, for instance, mannitol is used
to reduce cerebral oedema and brain mass before and after
neurosurgery, in acute tubular necrosis as a renal protector
(Levinsky and Bernard, 1988), and for the treatment of dialy-
sis disequilibrium syndrome. Because osmotic diuretics
extract water from the eye and brain, they are all used to
control intraocular pressure during acute attacks of glaucoma
and in ocular surgery.
Osmotic diuretic therapy can cause hypernatremia and
dehydration due to the loss of water in excess of electrolyte
loss. Conversely, their use can lead to hyponatremia, which is
responsible for the common adverse effects (headache, nausea
and vomiting). Hyperglycaemia can occur as a result of glyc-
erin metabolism.
Inhibitors of renal epithelial Na
+ channels
Inhibitors of renal epithelial Na + channels (Figure 1E) act in
the late distal tubule and collecting duct cells of the nephron
by inhibiting the Na
+ reabsorbtion and K + and H + secretion
(Figure 2E). The molecular mechanism is the blockage of epi-
thelial Na
+ channels in the luminal membrane by competi-
tion with Na+ for negatively charged areas within the pore of
the Na+ channel.
The only two drugs of this class in clinical use are triam-
terene and amiloride (structures pictured in Figure 1E). Both
drugs show a modest diuretic effect on their own and a small
increase in Na
+ and Cl- excretion. Typically, they are used in
combination with other diuretics to offset their severe kali-
uretic effects and preserve potassium levels in patients at risk
of hypokalaemia. In the treatment of oedema or hyperten-
sion, the combination of a Na
+ channel inhibitor with a
thiazide or loop diuretic enhances the diuretic and antihyper-
tensive effect.
Na
+ channel inhibitors show low oral bioavailability and
great differences in half-life (more than 20 h for amiloride,
less than 5 h for triamterene). The route of elimination is
predominantly renal for intact amiloride while triamterene is
extensively metabolized into the active 4-hydroxytriamterene
sulphate and excreted in urine. The most common adverse
effects of Na
+ channel inhibitors are nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhoea, headache, leg cramps and dizziness. The most danger-
ous adverse effect of Na
+ channel inhibitors is hyperkalemia.
Triamterene can also reduce glucose tolerance and induce
photosensitization.
Amiloride and triamterene were detected in 3% of positive
diuretic doping samples in 2008 (WADA, 2009a).
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (Figure 1F) are com-
petitive inhibitors of aldosterone that bind to and inhibit
cytosolic MRs found in the epithelial cells of the late distal
tubule and collecting duct of the nephron (Figure 2E).
The MR is a member of the steroid superfamily of nuclear
receptors. Normally, aldosterone enters the epithelial cell and
binds to MRs. The MR–aldosterone complex then translocates
to the nucleus where it binds to speciﬁc sequences of DNA
(hormone responsive elements) and thereby regulates the
expression of multiple gene products called aldosterone-
induced proteins. Unlike the MR–aldosterone complex, the
MR–antagonist complex is not able to induce the synthesis of
aldosterone-induced proteins.
The compounds belonging to this class (see Figure 1F for
molecular structures) are spironolactone, canrenone, potas-
sium canrenoate and eplerenone. The oral availability of
spironolactone, the prototype molecule of the class, is about
65%; it is metabolized extensively, undergoes enterohepatic
recirculation, highly binds to plasmatic proteins and has a
short half-life (approximately 1.6 h) (Beermann, 1984). Can-
renone is an active metabolite of spironolactone with a
10-fold greater half-life (16.5 h) that prolongs the effect of the
parent compound. Canrenoate is not active, but is converted
to canrenone in the body. Eplerenone has good oral availabil-
ity and is extensively metabolized.
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists have effects on
urinary excretion similar to renal epithelial Na
+ channel
inhibitors. The clinical efﬁcacy of MR antagonists strictly
depends on endogenous levels of aldosterone; higher levels
cause greater effects.
This group of diuretics is very useful as an alternative to
potassium replacement therapy. Usually, they are employed
in cases of high-aldosterone concentrations. In the treatment
of oedema and hypertension, these drugs are often
co-administered with thiazide or loop diuretics, as well as the
other K
+-sparing diuretics. Spironolactone is useful in the
treatment of primary hyperaldosteronism and refractory
Diuretics in sport doping
8 AB Cadwallader et al
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

oedema associated with secondary aldosteronism (Ouzan
et al., 2002). Similar to Na + channel inhibitors, the most
common adverse effect of MR antagonists is hyperkalemia.
Because of its molecular structure (Figure 1F), spironolac-
tone has some afﬁnity for progesterone and androgen
receptors that causes some side effects such as gynecomastia,
impotence and menstrual irregularities. Conversely, owing to
the 9,11-epoxide group, eplerenone has very low afﬁnity for
progesterone and androgen receptors ( <1% and <0.1%,
respectively) compared with spironolactone. Chronic admin-
istration of spironolactone can induce malignant tumours; in
particular, breast cancer has been observed. With regard to
drug–drug interactions, salicylates reduce the tubular secre-
tion of canrenone and decrease the diuretic efﬁcacy of
spironolactone, while spironolactone alters the clearance of
digitalis glycosides.
Canrenone and spironolactone together accounted for
4.3% of positive diuretic doping samples in 2008 (WADA,
2009a).
Diuretics and sports
General remarks
As previously mentioned, diuretics are commonly prescribed
in clinical medicine to treat hypertension and other cardio-
vascular disorders. These compounds are also frequently
encountered illicitly in sports. Diuretics are banned in all
sports because they can cause rapid weight loss and can act as
masking agents (to hide the effects of other prohibited sub-
stances) both in and out of competition. However, the World
Anti-Doping Code (WADA, 2009f) permits the therapeutic use
of diuretics when athletes and their physicians apply for
therapeutic use exemptions (TUE) according to the Interna-
tional Standard for TUE (WADA, 2009d). TUE is deﬁned as
‘the permission to use, for therapeutic purposes, substances or
methods contained in the List of Prohibited Substances or
Methods, whenever approved by a Therapeutic Use Exemp-
tion Committee based on a documented medical ﬁle before
the use of the substance in sports’. For diuretics, the primary
permitted therapeutic use is for hypertension (WADA, 2008b).
It should be noted that a TUE is not valid if an athlete’s urine
contains a diuretic in association with a threshold or sub-
threshold level of another exogenous substance included on
the Prohibited List. Because of the TUE, some athletes do use
diuretics for legitimate medicinal purposes; in many cases,
however, diuretic use is illicit (Clarkson and Thompson,
1997).
Diuretics and doping
Reasonably, the most effective use of diuretics in sport doping
would be before an anti-doping test. Diuretics increase urine
volume and dilute any doping agents as well as their metabo-
lites present in the urine and make their detection more
problematic by conventional anti-doping analysis. For this
reason, diuretics are classiﬁed as masking agents on the
WADA Prohibited List (class S5: ‘Diuretics and other masking
agents’) (WADA, 2009b).
Although there is little evidence of athletic performance
enhancement following diuretic administration, their abuse
is widespread among athletes who want to lose weight
quickly. For example, diuretic(s) use can allow an athlete to
transiently reduce body weight, which is a clear advantage in
wrestling, boxing, judo and weight-lifting as well as in general
sports where weight categories are involved and among ath-
letes who want to maintain a low body weight, such as female
gymnasts and ballet dancers. Skiers and mountain climbers,
however, make legitimate use of acetazolamide (a CA inhibi-
tor that also acts on sites different than the kidney) in pre-
venting AMS.
As already stated, diuretics are banned in sport because they
can be used: (i) directly, to produce a rapid weight loss that
can be critical to meet a weight category in sporting events;
and/or (ii) indirectly, to alter the normal metabolism/
excretion proﬁle of other doping drugs. In both cases and
discussed in more detail below, the diuretic administration
can be acute or chronic with administered doses that can
markedly exceed therapeutic levels. In general, athletes can
use diuretics in a single dose some hours before a competition
(i.e. wrestlers or sportsmen for masking purposes) or chroni-
cally abuse them for months (i.e. female gymnasts). It is
important to note that the diuretics most abused by athletes
(furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide and triamterene) have a
short half-life and are therefore undetectable in urine if
samples are not collected within 24–48 h after the last
administration.
Diuretics, exercise and weight loss
In an attempt to assess the signiﬁcance of diuretic use in
weight loss, Caldwell et al. (1984) compared the different
effect of exercise-, sauna- and diuretic-induced acute dehydra-
tion on weight change. The results showed a decrease of 2.3/H11006
0.8 kg after exercise, 3.5 /H110060.8 kg after sauna and 3.1 /H110060.8 kg
after furosemide administration respectively. Additionally,
diuretics are abused simultaneously with androgenic-anabolic
steroids by bodybuilders to accentuate muscle deﬁnition and
body tone. In the same study reported by Caldwellet al.i tw a s
demonstrated that the plasma volume change in athletes is
-0.9% after exercise, -10.3% after sauna and -14.1% after
furosemide administration (total amount of 1.7 mg·kg
-1 in
two divided doses, 16 h prior to testing) (Caldwell et al.,
1984).
Diuretics can have variety of physiological effects on exer-
cise physiology, including effects on metabolism (ther-
moregulation, potassium homeostasis), the cardiovascular
system and the respiratory system [pulmonary actions,
oxygen uptake (VO
2)]. Most of the effects are related to the
consequences of volume depletion and electrolyte imbalance
and depletion. Exercise can affect the action of diuretics as
well, with consequences on both pharmacology and pharma-
cokinetics. At the level of the nephron, exercise can both
complement and antagonize the effects of diuretics. Exercise
acutely induces a negative water balance and long-term
regular exercise lowers blood pressure, augmenting pharma-
cological properties of diuretics (Zappe et al., 1996). Exercise
also inﬂuences speciﬁc actions of diuretics; it can cause an
acute shift of intracellular potassium into the intravascular
Diuretics in sport doping
AB Cadwallader et al 9
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

space (Young et al., 1992) and potentiate the kaliuretic effect
of diuretics. While thiazide diuretics are associated with
insulin resistance (Moser, 1998), exercise potentiates the
opposite effect (Plasqui and Westerterp, 2007). In most cases,
physical exercise is used as a therapy for insulin resistance
because it activates the pancreatic b-cells via the neuroadren-
ergic system (Bordenave et al., 2008). This reduces blood
insulin levels and consequently increases hepatic glucose
release and decreases muscle utilization of insulin (Bonen
et al., 2006). Although there is little information on how
exercise affects diuretic pharmacokinetics, chlorothiazide,
hydrochlorothiazide and triamterene have an elimination
half-life short enough (1.5–4 h) to be affected by 1 h or more
of sustained exercise (Somani, 1996), which decreases renal
and hepatic blood ﬂow. Therefore, these substances are not
always detected in urine samples collected post-competition
or at the end of an intense training session. It is notable that
both exercise and diuretics can independently cause ﬂuid and
electrolyte loss. Table 2, adapted from Caldwell et al. (1984)
and Reents (2000), summarizes the effects of both exercise
and diuretics on renal physiology.
It is known that during exercise skeletal muscle temperature
exceeds core temperature within several minutes, and alter-
ation of the body’s thermoregulatory systems is a major risk of
diuretic abuse. The marked dehydration following diuretic
intake exerts a detrimental effect on the cardiovascular and
thermoregulatory systems of the body during exercise and
can lead to exhaustion, irregular heartbeat, heart attack
and death. Both acetazolamide (Brechue and Stager, 1990), a
mild diuretic, and furosemide (Claremont et al., 1976), a
potent diuretic, have been shown to impair adaptive increases
in skin blood ﬂow during exercise.
Diuretics affect potassium homeostasis in exercising muscle;
intracellular potassium and the resting membrane potential of
the cell both decrease. All diuretics except the potassium-
sparing agents increase kaliuresis, accelerating the depletion of
intracellular potassium. The resultant hypokaliemia can lead
to muscle cramps and to cardiac arrhythmias secondary to
electrolyte shifts/losses. On the other hand, overuse of
potassium-sparing diuretics such as spironolactone, triam-
terene and amiloride can lead to hyperkalaemia and conse-
quently may expose athletes to malignant arrhythmias
(Appleby et al., 1994). Moreover, the interference of most
diuretics with uric acid metabolism can cause a gout attack,
which can be very painful (Koutlianos and Kouidi, 2006).
Diuretic-induced dehydration inﬂuences exercise heart rate.
In particular, at lower exercise intensity a higher heart rate
results, while during maximal exercise exertion, the effect is
lower or almost absent (Stager et al., 1990). This is especially
true for acetazolamide (Brechue and Stager, 1990) and to a
lesser extent, furosemide abuse (Claremont et al., 1976).
Studies performed on CA inhibitors and thiazide diuretics
demonstrated that after administration of acetazolamide
(Brechue and Stager, 1990) or a hydrochlorothiazide–
triamterene combination (Nadel et al., 1980) plasma volume
and stroke volume are signiﬁcantly decreased. Loss of plasma
volume and stroke volume disrupts thermoregulation via
peripheral vasodilation (radiation cooling) and perspiration
(evaporative cooling), impairing both the acute and the long-
term physiological vasodilatory response to aerobic exercise.
Furthermore, aldosterone antagonists, in particular spirono-
lactone, interfere with the increase in aldosterone receptor
sensitivity due to exercise-induced hypervolemia (a conse-
quence of normal adaptation to regular exercise).
Additional effects of speciﬁc classes of diuretics
Because CA plays a key role in the acid-base regulation mecha-
nisms, CA inhibitors are the only class of diuretics that can
affect pulmonary function. Acetazolamide has been shown to
impair CO
2 elimination during exercise (Scheuermann et al.,
1999), but also impairs CO2 efﬂux from inactive muscle (Kow-
alchuk et al., 1992). In AMS, acetazolamide enhances alveolar
oxygenation by increasing arterial oxygen pressures and low-
ering arterial carbon dioxide pressures (Bradwell et al., 1986).
The cellular metabolic effects of acetazolamide may override
its pulmonary effects and cause an inhibition of VO
2 during
maximal exercise (Stager et al., 1990; Kowalchuk et al., 1992).
Furosemide decreases tidal volume, minute ventilation and
the respiratory exchange ratio at aerobic threshold (Caldwell
et al., 1984). Conversely, clinical data indicate that inhaled
furosemide reduces the exercise-induced bronchoconstriction
in asthmatic children (Munyard et al., 1995). The effects of
diuretics on VO
2 are variable. Furosemide causes a dose-
dependent effect; furosemide has no inﬂuence on VO 2 at low
doses (Armstrong et al., 1985; Baum et al., 1986), but VO 2
signiﬁcantly decreases at higher doses (Caldwell et al., 1984).
Acetazolamide affects VO 2 only during maximal exercise
(Stager et al., 1990; Kowalchuk et al., 1992) as VO 2 is not
affected under normoxic conditions (Brechue and Stager,
1990), but it is greatly improved under hypoxic conditions
(Schoene et al., 1983). Acetazolamide effects on performance
depends on altitude; at sea level (Heigenhauser et al., 1980)
and under normoxic conditions (Schoene et al., 1983; Stager
Table 2 Effects of exercise and diuretics on renal physiology [adapted from Caldwell (1987) and Reents (2000)]
GFR Urine Output PRA Aldosterone
Exercise @ 25% VO 2 max ↑↔↑ ↑
Exercise@%V O 2 max ↓ ↓ ↑↑ ↑↑
Thiazide diuretics ↓ ↓ ↑↑ ↑↑
Loop diuretics ↔↑ ↑↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
Spironolactone ↔ ↑ ↑↑ ↑↑
Other K +-sparing agents ↔ ↑ ↑↑ ↑↑
One arrow indicates a moderate effect; two arrows indicate a profound effect.
GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate; PRA, plasma renin activity; VO 2 max, maximum oxygen uptake.
Diuretics in sport doping
10 AB Cadwallader et al
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

et al., 1990) it may impair aerobic performance, but under
hypoxic conditions it decreases the time to exhaustion during
submaximal exercise (Stager et al., 1990).
Finally, thiazide diuretics are derivatives of sulphonamides
and can cause photosensitivity if exercising outdoors during
midday hours.
Caldwell et al. performed a diuretic-induced cycling work-
load reduction study to assess the effects of hypohydration on
cycle ergometer performance. In this study, VO
2 max
(maximum oxygen uptake) and workload while cycling
decrease in athletes after furosemide intake. Even after rehy-
dration, muscular endurance and performance are greatly
compromised by diuretic use (Caldwell et al., 1984). Addi-
tional studies performed on middle-distance runners (Arm-
strong et al., 1985) and wrestlers (Caldwell, 1987) conﬁrmed
that diuretics decrease the effects on overall athletic perfor-
mance. Although insufﬁcient data are available to establish
the effect of long-term diuretic treatment on exercise capacity,
it has been clearly shown that both single dose and short-term
diuretic treatment adversely affect maximal exercise capacity
and the duration of prolonged submaximal exercise (Fagard
et al., 1993). For the multitude of reasons mentioned above,
the drawbacks related to diuretic administration outweigh the
potential advantages of lowering of weight and urine dilution;
dehydration drastically impairs aerobic capacity and muscular
strength and decreases metabolic efﬁciency. This results in a
detrimental effect on overall sport and exercise ability and
especially on athletic performance (Caldwellet al., 1984; Arm-
strong et al., 1985). In addition, a potential effect of diuretics
abuse is the possible alteration of the glomerular ﬁltration size,
which depends on a series of parameters (Edwardset al., 1999),
most of which can markedly be affected by the mechanism of
action of the different classes of diuretics. Finally, it should be
noted that disqualiﬁcation from competition as well as the
other, previously mentioned detrimental effects of diuretic
abuse offset any perceived beneﬁts.
Although many of the studies highlighted above were pub-
lished in the 1980s and 1990s, diuretics are still widely abused
in sport (and among the most prescribed therapeutic agents).
Few studies of the effects of diuretics on athletes have been
published recently because in recent times, most studies
assessing doping agents and exercise and sport have focused
on newer drugs and methods of performance enhancement.
Diuretic use for the masking of other prohibited substances
remains a serious problem, however.
Analysis of diuretics
General remarks
For the detection of diuretics in urine in sports doping, a
single minimum required performance level (MRPL) of
250 ng·mL
-1 is ﬁxed by WADA for accredited laboratories
(WADA, 2009e). Even though the relative potencies, metabo-
lism and elimination properties vary dramatically (and result
in different urinary levels) between the classes of diuretics
(Table 3), the MRPL at 250 ng·mL
-1 is sufﬁcient to detect acute
diuretic abuse by athletes. Lower dosages of diuretics are likely
to be insufﬁcient at causing the masking effect or dramatic
and acute weight loss abusers seek.
Several analytical techniques have been proposed for the
analysis of diuretics, primarily among them HPLC-UV-DAD,
GC/MS, LC/MS and LC/MS-MS, micellar electrokinetic chro-
matography and capillary electrophoresis. However, the best
solution for a comprehensive screening method capable of
detecting the presence in a biological sample of any diuretic,
at the same time satisfying the WADA ﬁxed MRPL is repre-
sented by methods based on GC/MS, LC/MS and LC/MS-MS.
Typically, the use of GC/MS, LC/MS and LC/MS-MS instru-
mentation detects diuretic parent compounds and/or the
most diagnostic and abundant metabolites. However, in some
instances, the target analyte may not be the parent com-
pound or its metabolites, but one or more degradation prod-
ucts formed after the hydrolysis of the diuretics in aqueous
media. This is the case of thiazide diuretics, and primarily
among them hydrochlorthiazide and althiazide. This phe-
nomenon is more relevant when there is a delay between
collection of the sample and the laboratory analysis (Thieme
et al., 2001; Goebel et al., 2004; Deventer et al., 2009).
In the 1980s and 1990s, GC/MS was the most common
analytical technique used by the anti-doping laboratories for
the analysis of xenobiotics in urine (Maurer, 1992; Hemmers-
bach and de la Torre, 1996). Historically, diuretics were also
screened for by GC/MS [extensively reviewed by Ventura and
Segura, 1996 (Ventura & Segura, 1996)]. The recent evolution
towards LC/MS (see below) has been driven by a series of
concomitant causes that make the GC/MS-based approach
less preferred than it was in the past two decades: (i) the
number of target substances, and especially of low-molecular-
weight xenobiotics, to be screened for in anti-doping analysis
increased dramatically in the period 2002–2007 promoting
the development of more ‘universal’ analytical techniques
aimed to reduce the ratio of resources/assay; (ii) the need to
simplify sample pretreatment due to the increased number of
analytical procedures running simultaneously in anti-doping
laboratories; and (iii) the technological advances in the ﬁeld
of analytical instrumentation, and, more speciﬁcally, the
availability of benchtop LC/MS and LC/MS-MS systems at an
affordable price. All of the above occurrences promoted a
progressive shift from GC/MS to LC/MS.
Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry
Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry is still used by many
anti-doping laboratories and can still represent a valid alter-
native for the anti-doping analysis of diuretics. A general
analytical procedure based on GC/MS is structured as a series
of pretreatment steps (at the minimum: extraction of the
diuretics from the biological matrix and chemical derivatiza-
tion) to be carried out before the chromatographic run.
Sample pretreatment. As it is known, the GC/MS analysis of
biological samples to screen for diuretics requires a series of
pre-instrumental procedures aimed to make the sample suit-
able for the analysis. Basically, the critical steps are repre-
sented by the extraction of the diuretics from the biological
matrix and the chemical derivatization performed to increase
volatility and thermal stability of the target compounds.
Different methods have been published for the detection of
diuretics in urine using liquid/liquid (L/L) and solid phase
Diuretics in sport doping
AB Cadwallader et al 11
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

(SPE) extraction procedures. SPE can allow the recovery of
diuretics with higher yields, but at the same time the use of
disposable cartridges increases the overall cost of the pretreat-
ment procedure, especially in the case of more complex
supports, like internal surface reversed-phase supports
(ISRP-size exclusion). Commercially available pre-activated
columns have been tested for their efﬁcacy and the best
choice should depend on the characteristics of the matrix and
on the expected composition of the sample [reviewed by
Ventura and Segura in 1996 (Ventura and Segura, 1996)].
On the other hand, L/L extraction generally requires mul-
tiple extraction procedures. When the detection of all diuret-
ics (basic, acidic and neutral) is desired, the optimal solution
is a process based on two separate L/L extraction procedures
(one in neutral or basic medium, and another in acidic
medium) using ethyl acetate or a mixture of organic solvents.
Anhydrous sodium sulphate can be added to promote a
salting-out effect. Particular care has to be dedicated to the
study of potential degradation processes that could involve
target compounds. Oxidation of thiazides (althiazide, benz-
thiazide and polythiazide) has been demonstrated in the pres-
ence of ethyl acetate, so the efﬁcacy and the non-reactivity of
different extraction solvents has to be preliminarily assessed.
In some instances, two or more pretreatment steps can be
combined, as in the case of extractive methylation in which
both the extraction and the derivatization steps are combined
in a single procedure.
Derivatization procedures. As mentioned above, derivatiza-
tion is necessary prior to GC/MS analysis as most diuretics
are not sufﬁciently volatile, lipophilic or thermally stable to
be directly assayed with this analytical technique. The most
common derivatization procedures are silylation and methy-
lation, but the latter is usually preferred as it allows sufﬁcient
yields of more stable derivatives for most diuretics to be
obtained [reviewed by Carreras et al. in 1994 (Carreras et al.,
1994)]. Methylation can be performed ‘statically’ (by a
mixture of methyl iodide and acetone under thermal
Table 3 Properties of diuretics important for analytical method development [adapted from Ventura and Segura (1996) and Jackson (2006)]
pKa logP Relative potency * Elimination route Metabolism %
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Acetazolamide 7.4, 9.1 -0.3 1 Renal 0
7.2, 9.0
Dichlorphenamide 7.4, 8.6 1.0 30 NA NA
Methazolamide 7.3 -0.2 >1, <10 Renal 75, Hepatic
Na
+/K+/2Cl- symporter inhibitors (loop diuretics)
Furosemide 3.8, 7.5 2.0 1 Renal 35, Renal
Bumetanide 3.6, 7.7 2.6 40 Renal 38, Hepatic
Ethacrynic acid 3.5 3.7 0.7 Renal 33, Hepatic
Torsemide 7.1 2.5 3 Renal 80, Hepatic
Azosemide 6.8 3.3 1 Renal 63, Hepatic
Piretanide 4.1 1.9 3 Renal 50, Hepatic
Tripamide NA NA NA NA NA
Na
+/Cl- symporter inhibitors (thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics)
Bendroﬂumethiazide 9.0 1.9 10 Renal 70, Hepatic
Chlorothiazide 6.85 -1.9 0.1 Renal 0
Hydrochlorothiazide 9.5, 11.3 -0.1 1 Renal 0
Hydroﬂumethiazide 8.9 0.4 1 Renal 20–60, Hepatic
Methyclothiazide 9.4 1.4 10 Renal 100, Hepatic
Polythiazide NA 1.9 25 Renal 25–75, Unknown
Trichlormethiazide 8.6 0.6 25 Renal 0
Chlorthalidone 9.4 0.8 1 Renal, bile 25. Unknown
Indapamide 8.8 2.7 20 Renal 100, Hepatic
Metolazone NA 1.8 10 Renal, bile 10, Hepatic
Quinethazone NA 0.2 1 NA NA
Osmotic diuretics
Glycerin NA -2.3 NA Renal 80, Hepatic
Isosorbide NA 1.3(di) NA Renal 0
-0.2
(mono)
Mannitol NA -3.1 NA Renal, bile 20, Renal
Urea NA -2.1 NA Renal 0
Renal epithelial Na
+ channel inhibitors (some potassium-sparing diuretics)
Amiloride 8.7 0.3 1 Renal 0
Triamterene 6.2 1.0 0.1 Renal 100, Hepatic
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (aldosterone antagonists and some potassium-sparing diuretics)
Spironolactone NA 2.8 NA Renal 100, Hepatic
Canrenone NA 3.5 NA Renal 100, Hepatic
Potassium canrenoate NA NA NA Renal 100, Hepatic
Eplerenone NA 2.3 NA Renal 100, Hepatic
*Potency is relative to diuretics within the same class.
NA, data not available.
Diuretics in sport doping
12 AB Cadwallader et al
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

heating) or ‘dynamically’ by either extractive methylation
(Lisi et al., 1991; Lisi et al., 1992) or ‘on column’ methylation
(ﬂash methylation) (Beyer et al., 2005). When methylation is
performed by a stand-alone process, the time can be drasti-
cally reduced by microwave irradiation, either in combina-
tion or as an alternative to thermal incubation (Amendola
et al., 2003).
Chromatographic and spectrometric conditions. The best sta-
tionary phase for the analysis of diuretic compounds is phe-
nylmethylsilicone, allowing for the effective separation of all
diuretics within a reasonable time ( <15 min). Drastically
shorter times can be obtained by fast-GC systems, in which
last generation columns and mass spectrometric detection
relying on fast electronics are successfully coupled. Fast-GC
systems provide a 10-fold reduction of the overall
chromatographic run (Morra et al., 2006). Electron impact
ionization and MS detection are the most described methods
used [reviewed in Ventura and Segura, 1996 and by Müller
et al. in 1999 (Ventura and Segura, 1996; Müller et al., 1999)].
The mass spectra of the methyl derivatives of diuretics have
been described by different authors, and the fragmentation
proﬁles have been also interpreted by comparison with the
deuterated methyl derivatives (Yoon et al., 1990).
Liquid-chromatography/mass spectrometry
When diuretics were introduced on the list of forbidden sub-
stances by the International Sports Authorities, the ﬁrst
attempts to create a screening method for their detection were
based on HPLC. At that time, UV diode array was used as
detector as it facilitated peak identiﬁcation (Ventura and
Segura, 1996). According to IOC/WADA requirements, the
conﬁrmation procedures needed to support a positive case
should be based on MS. Because of this, a GC/MS method
after methylation of the compounds was, in most of the cases,
the technique of choice. For the reasons explained in previous
sections, at the end of the 1990s, when more robust, reliable
and affordable LC/MS instruments became available, major
changes in the strategies for the detection of diuretics in the
doping ﬁeld were introduced. First attempts to use LC/MS for
the detection of diuretics started in the beginning of 1990s
using thermospray or particle beam interfaces (Ventura et al.,
1991) in conﬁrmation analyses. The lack of robustness of the
equipment did not permit a daily running screening method
based on these instruments.
Thieme et al. (Thieme et al., 2001) described a method for
the analyses of 32 diuretics in human urine by LC/MS/MS
using an electrospray ionization technique. This technique
has the advantage that the traditional LC ﬂow rates and
reverse-phased LC columns (octadecylsilane-ODS columns
w i t h5o r3 mm particle size) usually used in LC-UV methods
can be used. Additionally, both positive and negative ioniza-
tion modes can by used simultaneously permitting the detec-
tion of both acidic and basic compounds included among
diuretics. The analysis by tandem MS with triple stage qua-
drupoles were selective and sensitive enough compared with
previous methods and made simpliﬁcation of sample prepa-
ration possible as the cleanness of the urinary extracts was
less critical compared with previously designed LC-UV
methods.
The development of new analysers (ion traps) coupled to
LC created additional alternatives for the analysis of diuretics
by LC/MS (Deventer et al., 2002). Even more recently, the
need for more universal strategies for doping agents analysis
introduced the use of time-of-ﬂight analysers (Georgakopou-
los et al., 2007) that can be coupled to LC. For some com-
pounds and for identiﬁcations purposes, ionization by
atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (another possible
ionization technique of LC/MS interfaces) is of interest as it
produces additional fragmentation (Qin et al., 2003).
The selectivity and sensitivity of these techniques allowed
the inclusion of additional non-diuretic drugs, also forbidden
in sports, in the same screening procedures (Deventer et al.,
2005; Mazzarino et al., 2008). Additionally, different
approaches for sample preparation have been explored. In the
past, classical double extractions with organic solvents at
acidic and basic pH were used to permit the recovery of
diuretics presenting different physicochemical properties.
The new features of the instruments and the extension of
the screening methods to other compounds expand the pos-
sibilities of sample preparation. Speciﬁc SPE procedures can be
performed in robotic systems (Goebel et al., 2004) and some
analytical procedures require no sample preparation, just a
dilution the urine sample and subsequent direct injection
into the LC/MS system (Politi et al., 2007; Thorngren et al.,
2008). The improvements in the scanning speed of the mass
spectrometers as well as better performing LC columns and
LC pumps allow an increase in the speed of analysis (UPLC or
fast LC) and of more heterogeneous screening procedures by
LC/MS/MS. Currently, there are analyses that includes diuret-
ics among other doping substances where more than 100
different compounds can be analysed in less than 10 min
(Thorngren et al., 2008; Ventura et al., 2008).
Summary and conclusion
The members of the diuretic class of drugs vary greatly in
structure, physicochemical properties and site and mecha-
nism of action. In the 1990s the analysis of diuretics in
doping (by LC-UV or GC/MS) was a challenge for anti-doping
laboratories due to the heterogeneity of the substances
included. Since the advent of robust and reliable LC/MS
instruments their detection in urine samples is no longer a
problem. Future goals of diuretic analysis include developing
more efﬁcient and more economical detection methods.
Increasing the sensitivity of the methods and the number of
compounds in the screen while decreasing the analysis time
and cost to laboratories would be welcome improvements.
Additionally, the development of methods that combine the
detection of diuretics with other prohibited substances will
enhance the ability of laboratories to monitor abuse and
doping in sports.
Acknowledgements
The Authors wish to acknowledge the support of the National
Anti-Doping Commission (‘Commissione di Vigilanza sul
Doping’) of the Italian Department of Health.
Diuretics in sport doping
AB Cadwallader et al 13
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

Statement of conﬂict of interest
None.
References
Amendola L, Colamonici C, Mazzarino M, Botrè F (2003). Rapid deter-
mination of diuretics in human urine by gas chromatography –
mass spectrometry following microwave assisted derivatization.
Anal Chim Acta 475: 125–136.
Appleby M, Fisher M, Martin M (1994). Myocardial infarction, hyper-
kalaemia and ventricular tachycardia in a young male body-builder.
Int J Cardiol 44: 171–174.
Armstrong LE, Costill DL, Fink WJ (1985). Inﬂuence of diuretic-
induced dehydration on competitive running performance. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 17: 456–461.
Barroso O, Mazzoni I, Rabin O (2008). Hormone abuse in sports: the
antidoping perspective. Asian J Androl 10: 391–402.
Baum K, Essfeld D, Stegemann J (1986). The inﬂuence of furosemide
on heart rate and oxygen uptake in exercising man. Eur J Appl
Physiol Occup Physiol 55: 619–623.
Beermann B (1984). Aspects on pharmacokinetics of some diuretics.
Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh) 54 (Suppl. 1): 17–29.
Beyer J, Bierl A, Peters FT, Maurer HH (2005). Screening procedure for
detection of diuretics and uricosurics and/or their metabolites in
human urine using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry after
extractive methylation. Ther Drug Monit 27: 509–520.
Bonen A, Dohm GL, van Loon LJ (2006). Lipid metabolism, exercise
and insulin action. Essays Biochem 42: 47–59.
Bordenave S, Brandou F, Manetta J, Fedou C, Mercier J, Brun JF (2008).
Effects of acute exercise on insulin sensitivity, glucose effectiveness
and disposition index in type 2 diabetic patients.Diabetes Metab 34:
250–257.
Botrè F (2008). New and old challenges of sports drug testing. J Mass
Spectrom 43: 903–907.
Botrè F, Botrè C (1993). The carbonic anhydrases: are these enzymes
still a good deal for a pharmacologist? Curr Top Med Chem 1: 313–
347.
Bradwell AR, Dykes PW, Coote JH, Forster PJ, Milles JJ, Chesner I et al.
(1986). Effect of acetazolamide on exercise performance and muscle
mass at high altitude. Lancet 1: 1001–1005.
Brechue WF, Stager JM (1990). Acetazolamide alters temperature regu-
lation during submaximal exercise. J Appl Physiol 69: 1402–
1407.
Caldwell JE (1987). Diuretic therapy and exercise performance. Sports
Med 4: 290–304.
Caldwell JE, Ahonen E, Nousiainen U (1984). Differential effects of
sauna-, diuretic-, and exercise-induced hypohydration. J Appl
Physiol 57: 1018–1023.
Carreras D, Imaz C, Navajas R, Garcia MA, Rodriguez C, Rodriguez AF
et al. (1994). Comparison of derivatization procedures for the deter-
mination of diuretics in urine by gas chromatography-mass spec-
trometry. J Chromatogr A 683: 195–202.
Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL
et al. (2003). Seventh report of the Joint national committee on
prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood
pressure. Hypertension 42: 1206–1252.
Claremont AD, Costill DL, Fink W, Van Handel P (1976). Heat toler-
ance following diuretic induced dehydration. Med Sci Sports 8: 239–
243.
Clarkson PM, Thompson HS (1997). Drugs and sport. Research ﬁnd-
ings and limitations. Sports Med 24: 366–384.
Coote JH (1991). Pharmacological control of altitude sickness. Trends
Pharmacol Sci 12: 450–455.
Cowan DA, Kicman AT (1997). Doping in sport: misuse, analytical
tests, and legal aspects. Clin Chem 43: 1110–1113.
Deventer K, Delbeke FT, Roels K, Van Eenoo P (2002). Screening for 18
diuretics and probenecid in doping analysis by liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Biomed Chromatogr
16: 529–535.
Deventer K, Van Eenoo P, Delbeke FT (2005). Simultaneous determi-
nation of beta-blocking agents and diuretics in doping analysis
by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry with scan-to-scan
polarity switching. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 19: 90–98.
Deventer K, Pozo OJ, Van Eenoo P, Delbeke FT (2009). Detection of
urinary markers for thiazide diuretics after oral administration of
hydrochlorothiazide and altizide-relevance to doping control
analysis. J Chromatogr A 1216: 2466–2473.
Dormans TP, van Meyel JJ, Gerlag PG, Tan Y, Russel FG, Smits P
(1996). Diuretic efﬁcacy of high dose furosemide in severe heart
failure: bolus injection versus continuous infusion.J Am Coll Cardiol
28: 376–382.
Edwards A, Daniels BS, Deen WM (1999). Ultrastructural model for
size selectivity in glomerular ﬁltration. Am J Physiol 276 (6 Pt 2):
F892–F902.
Fagard R, Staessen J, Thijs L, Amery A (1993). Inﬂuence of anti-
hypertensive drugs on exercise capacity. Drugs 46 (Suppl. 2):
32–36.
Faris R, Flather M, Purcell H, Henein M, Poole-Wilson P, Coats A
(2002). Current evidence supporting the role of diuretics in heart
failure: a meta analysis of randomised controlled trials. Int J Cardiol
82: 149–158.
Friedman PA, Bushinsky DA (1999). Diuretic effects on calcium
metabolism. Semin Nephrol 19: 551–556.
Furlanello F, Serdoz LV, Cappato R, De Ambroggi L (2007). Illicit drugs
and cardiac arrhythmias in athletes.Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil14:
487–494.
Georgakopoulos CG, Vonaparti A, Stamou M, Kiousi P, Lyris E, Angelis
YS et al. (2007). Preventive doping control analysis: liquid and gas
chromatography time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry for detection of
designer steroids. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 21: 2439–2446.
Goebel C, Trout GJ, Kazlauskas R (2004). Rapid screening method for
diuretics in doping control using automated solid phase extraction
and liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrom-
etry. Anal Chim Acta 502: 65–74.
Heigenhauser GJF, Sutton JR, Jones NL (1980). Ventilation and carbon
dioxide output during exercise: effects of glycogen depletion
and carbonic anhydrase inhibition. Med Sci Sports Exerc 12: 123.
van der Heijden M, Donders SH, Cleophas TJ, Niemeyer MG, van der
Meulen J, Bernink PJ et al. (1998). A randomized, placebo-
controlled study of loop diuretics in patients with essential hyper-
tension: the bumetanide and furosemide on lipid proﬁle (BUFUL)
clinical study report. J Clin Pharmacol 38: 630–635.
Hemmersbach P, de la Torre R (1996). Stimulants, narcotics and beta-
blockers: 25 years of development in analytical techniques for
doping control. J Chromatogr B Biomed Appl 687: 221–238.
Jackson EK (2006). Diuretics. In: Brunton L, Lazo J, Parker K (eds).
Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics ,
11th edn. McGraw-Hill: New York, pp. 737–770.
Koutlianos N, Kouidi E (2006). Renal disorders and electrolyte metabo-
lism. In: Sarikaya H, Peters C, Schulz T, Schonfelder M, Michna H
(eds). Congress Manual: Biomedical Side Effects of Doping. A Project of
the European Union: Munich, pp. 112–118. Available for order
from the Institute of Public Health Research, Technische Universität
München.
Kowalchuk JM, Heigenhauser GJ, Sutton JR, Jones NL (1992). Effect of
acetazolamide on gas exchange and acid-base control after maximal
exercise. J Appl Physiol 72: 278–287.
Levinsky NG, Bernard DB (1988). Mannitol and loop diuretics in acute
renal failure. In: Brenner BM, Lazarus JM (eds). Acute Renal Failure,
2nd edn. Churchill-Livingstone: New York, pp. 841–856.
Lisi AM, Trout GJ, Kazlauskas R (1991). Screening for diuretics in
human urine by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry with
Diuretics in sport doping
14 AB Cadwallader et al
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

derivatisation by direct extractive alkylation. J Chromatogr 563:
257–270.
Lisi AM, Kazlauskas R, Trout GJ (1992). Diuretic screening in human
urine by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry: use of a macrore-
ticular acrylic copolymer for the efﬁcient removal of the coex-
tracted phase-transfer reagent after derivatization by direct
extractive alkylation. J Chromatogr 581: 57–63.
McGrath JC, Cowan DA (2008) Drugs in sport. Br J Pharmacol 154:
493–495.
Maurer HH (1992). Systematic toxicological analysis of drugs and their
metabolites by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. J Chro-
matogr 580: 3–41.
Mazzarino M, Botrè F, Rossi F, Paone E, Pecori-Giraldi J (2001). Lack of
increased diuresis after topical administration of the carbonic
anhydrase inhibitor dorzolamide. In: Schänzer W, Geyer H,
Gotzman A, Mareck-Engelke U (eds). Recent Advances in Doping
Analysis (9). Sport & Buch Strauß: Köln, pp. 269–273.
Mazzarino M, de la Torre X, Botre F (2008). A screening method for the
simultaneous detection of glucocorticoids, diuretics, stimulants,
anti-oestrogens, beta-adrenergic drugs and anabolic steroids in
human urine by LC-ESI-MS/MS. Anal Bioanal Chem 392: 681–698.
Monroy A, Plata C, Hebert SC, Gamba G (2000). Characterization of the
thiazide-sensitive Na( +)-Cl(-) cotransporter: a new model for ions
and diuretics interaction. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol279: F161–F169.
Morra V, Davit P, Capra P, Vincenti M, Di Stilo A, Botre F (2006). Fast
gas chromatographic/mass spectrometric determination of diuretics
and masking agents in human urine: development and validation
of a productive screening protocol for antidoping analysis. J Chro-
matogr A 1135: 219–229.
Moser M (1998). Why are physicians not prescribing diuretics more
frequently in the management of hypertension? JAMA 279: 1813–
1816.
Müller RK, Grosse J, Thieme D, Lang R, Teske J, Trauer H (1999).
Introduction to the application of capillary gas chromatography of
performance-enhancing drugs in doping control. J Chromatogr A
843: 275–285.
Munyard P, Chung KF, Bush A (1995). Inhaled frusemide and exercise-
induced bronchoconstriction in children with asthma. Thorax 50:
677–679.
Nadel ER, Fortney SM, Wenger CB (1980). Effect of hydration state of
circulatory and thermal regulations. J Appl Physiol 49: 715–721.
Ouzan J, Perault C, Lincoff AM, Carre E, Mertes M (2002). The role of
spironolactone in the treatment of patients with refractory hyper-
tension. Am J Hypertens 15 (4 Pt 1): 333–339.
Plasqui G, Westerterp KR (2007). Physical activity and insulin resis-
tance. Curr Nutr Food Sci 3: 157–160.
Politi L, Morini L, Polettini A (2007). A direct screening procedure for
diuretics in human urine by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry with information dependent acquisition. Clin Chim
Acta 386: 46–52.
Qin Y, Wang XB, Wang C, Zhao M, Wu MT, Xu YX et al. (2003).
Application of high-performance liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry to detection of diuretics in human urine.J Chromatogr
B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 794: 193–203.
Reents S (2000). Sport and Exercise Pharmacology . Human Kinetics:
Champaign, IL.
Scheuermann BW, Kowalchuk JM, Paterson DH, Cunningham DA
(1999). VCO2 and VE kinetics during moderate- and heavy-
intensity exercise after acetazolamide administration. J Appl Physiol
86: 1534–1543.
Schoene RB, Bates PW, Larson EB, Pierson DJ (1983). Effect of aceta-
zolamide on normoxic and hypoxic exercise in humans at sea level.
J Appl Physiol 55: 1772–1776.
Schwartz GJ (2002). Physiology and molecular biology of renal car-
bonic anhydrase. J Nephrol 15 (Suppl. 5): S61–S74.
Shankar SS, Brater DC (2003). Loop diuretics: from the Na-K-2Cl
transporter to clinical use. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 284: F11–F21.
Somani SM (1996).Pharmacology in Exercise and Sports. CRC Press: Boca
Raton, FL.
Stager JM, Tucker A, Cordain L, Engebretsen BJ, Brechue WF, Matulich
CC (1990). Normoxic and acute hypoxic exercise tolerance in
man following acetazolamide. Med Sci Sports Exerc 22: 178–
184.
Tashian RE (2000). Keeping pace with a fast enzyme: steps and mis-
steps. EXS: 569–596.
Thevis M, Schanzer W (2007). Mass spectrometry in sports drug
testing: Structure characterization and analytical assays. Mass Spec-
trom Rev 26: 79–107.
Thieme D, Grosse J, Lang R, Mueller RK, Wahl A (2001). Screening,
conﬁrmation and quantiﬁcation of diuretics in urine for doping
control analysis by high-performance liquid chromatography-
atmospheric pressure ionisation tandem mass spectrometry. J Chro-
matogr B Biomed Sci Appl 757: 49–57.
Thorngren JO, Ostervall F, Garle M (2008). A high-throughput multi-
component screening method for diuretics, masking agents, central
nervous system (CNS) stimulants and opiates in human urine by
UPLC-MS/MS. J Mass Spectrom 43: 980–992.
Trout GJ, Kazlauskas R (2004). Sports drug testing – an analyst’s per-
spective. Chem Soc Rev 33: 1–13.
Ventura R, Segura J (1996). Detection of diuretic agents in doping
control. J Chromatogr B Biomed Appl 687: 127–144.
Ventura R, Fraisse D, Becchi M, Paisse O, Segura J (1991). Approach to
the analysis of diuretics and masking agents by high-performance
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry in doping control. J
Chromatogr 562: 723–736.
Ventura R, Roig M, Montfort N, Saez P, Berges R, Segura J (2008).
High-throughput and sensitive screening by ultra-performance
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry of diuretics and
other doping agents. Eur J Mass Spectrom (Chichester, Eng) 14: 191–
200.
WADA (2004). The 2003 WADA Laboratory Statistics. Available at
http://www.wada-ama.org/rtecontent/document/LABSTATS_2003.
pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2005). The 2004 WADA Laboratory Statistics. Available at
http://www.wada-ama.org/rtecontent/document/LABSTATS_2004.
pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2006). The 2005 WADA Laboratory Statistics. Available at
http://www.wada-ama.org/rtecontent/document/LABSTATS_2005.
pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2007). The 2006 WADA Laboratory Statistics. Available at
http://www.wada-ama.org/rtecontent/document/LABSTATS_2006.
pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2008a). The 2007 WADA Laboratory Statistics. Available at
http://www.wada-ama.org/rtecontent/document/LABSTATS_2007.
PDF (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2008b). Medical Information to Support the Decisions of
TUECs Arterial Hypertension. Available at http://www.wada-
ama.org/rtecontent/document/Arterial_Hypertension_en.pdf (acc-
essed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2009a). The 2008 WADA Laboratory Statistics. Available
at http://www.wada-ama.org/rtecontent/document/WADA_2008_
LaboratoryStatisticsReport_Final.pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2009b). The 2009 WADA Prohibited List. Available at http://
www.wada-ama.org/rtecontent/document/2009_Prohibited_List_
ENG_Final_20_Sept_08.pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2009c). International Standard for Laboratories. Available
at http://www.wada-ama.org/Documents/World_Anti-Doping_
Program/WADPIS-Laboratories/WADA_Int.Standard_Laboratories_
2009_EN.pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2009d). International Standard for Therapeutic Use Exemp-
tions. In: International Standard for Therapeutic Use Exemptions .
Available at http://www.wada-ama.org/Documents/World_Anti-
Doping_Program/WADP-IS-TUE/WADA_ISTUE_2010_EN.pdf (acc-
essed 14 April 2010)
Diuretics in sport doping
AB Cadwallader et al 15
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16

WADA (2009e). Minimum Required Performance Levels for the Detec-
tion of Prohibited Substances. Available at http://stage.wada-ama.
org/Documents/World_Anti-Doping_Program/WADPIS-Laboratories/
WADA_TD2009_MRPL_V2.0_EN.pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
WADA (2009f). World Anti-Doping Code. [WWW document]. URL
http://www.wada-ama.org/rtecontent/document/code_v2009_En.
pdf (accessed 14 April 2010)
Wilcox CS, Welch WJ, Schreiner GF, Belardinelli L (1999). Natriuretic
and diuretic actions of a highly selective adenosine A1 receptor
antagonist. J Am Soc Nephrol 10: 714–720.
Yoon CN, Lee TH, Park J (1990). Mass spectrometry of methyl and
methyl-d3 derivatives of diuretic agents. J Anal Toxicol 14: 96–
101.
Young DB, Srivastava TN, Fitzovich DE, Kivlighn SD, Hamaguchi M
(1992). Potassium and catecholamine concentrations in the
immediate post exercise period. Am J Med Sci 304: 150–
153.
Zappe DH, Helyar RG, Green HJ (1996). The interaction between
short-term exercise training and a diuretic-induced hypovolemic
stimulus. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 72: 335–340.
Diuretics in sport doping
16 AB Cadwallader et al
British Journal of Pharmacology (2010) 161 1–16