SGLT2 inhibitors: updated advice on the risk of diabetic ketoacidosis - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Drug Safety Update SGLT2 inhibitors: updated advice on the risk of diabetic ketoacidosis Test for raised ketones in patients with ketoacidosis symptoms, even if plasma glucose levels are near-normal. From: Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency Published: 18 April 2016 Therapeutic area: Endocrinology, diabetology and metabolism Contents Reports of diabetic acidosis Risk factors SGLT2 inhibitors – medicines in this class Further information Advice for healthcare professionals: When treating patients who are taking a sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 ( SGLT2 ) inhibitor (canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, or empagliflozin): inform them of the signs and symptoms of diabetic ketoacidosis ( DKA ) – see below – and advise them to seek immediate medical advice if they develop any of these discuss the risk factors for DKA with patients (see below) discontinue treatment with the SGLT2 inhibitor immediately if DKA is suspected or diagnosed do not restart treatment with any SGLT2 inhibitor in patients who experienced DKA during use, unless another cause for DKA was identified and resolved interrupt treatment with the SGLT2 inhibitor in patients who are hospitalised for major surgery or acute serious illnesses; treatment may be restarted once the patient’s condition has stabilised report suspected side effects to SGLT2 inhibitors or any other medicines on a Yellow Card Reports of diabetic acidosis EU medicines regulators have completed a review of DKA associated with SGLT2 inhibitor treatment; this article summarises the review’s recommendations. We published preliminary advice on this in June 2015. SGLT2 inhibitors are licensed for use in adults with type 2 diabetes to improve glycaemic control. Serious, life-threatening, and fatal cases of DKA have been reported in patients taking an SGLT2 inhibitor (canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, or empagliflozin). The EU review concluded that this side effect is rare (affecting between 1 in 1000 and 1 in 10,000 patients). Up to 26 February 2016, we had received 118 Yellow Card reports of DKA and associated reactions in patients taking an SGLT2 inhibitor in the UK. In several cases, blood glucose levels were only moderately elevated (eg <14mmol/L)—representing an atypical presentation for DKA , which could delay diagnosis and treatment. Therefore inform patients of the signs and symptoms of DKA (eg rapid weight loss, feeling sick or being sick, stomach pain, fast and deep breathing, sleepiness, a sweet smell to the breath, a sweet or metallic taste in the mouth, or a different odour to urine or sweat) and test for raised ketones in patients with these signs and symptoms. A substantial proportion of the cases concerned off-label use in patients with type 1 diabetes. We remind you that SGLT2 inhibitors should not be used in patients with type 1 diabetes. Many of the cases of DKA occurred during the first 2 months of treatment and some shortly after stopping the SGLT2 inhibitor. In some cases, just before or at the first development of DKA , patients had dehydration, low food intake, weight loss, infection, surgery, vomiting, a decrease in insulin dose, or poor control of diabetes. Risk factors The mechanism by which SGLT2 inhibitors might lead to DKA has not been established. However, the following factors may predispose patients taking an SGLT2 inhibitor to DKA : a low beta cell function reserve (eg, patients with type 2 diabetes who have low C-peptide levels, latent autoimmune diabetes in adults [LADA], or a history of pancreatitis) conditions leading to restricted food intake or severe dehydration sudden reduction in insulin increased insulin requirements due to acute illness surgery alcohol abuse Discuss these risk factors with patients and use SGLT2 inhibitors with caution in patients who have them. SGLT2 inhibitors – medicines in this class The SGLT2 inhibitors marketed in the UK are listed below. Click on the brand name to see the summary of product characteristics (SPC). Brand name Active substance(s) Forxiga ▼ Dapagliflozin tablets (5 mg and 10 mg) Xigduo ▼ Dapagliflozin/metformin tablets (5 mg/850 mg and 5 mg/1000 mg) Invokana ▼ Canagliflozin tablets (100 mg and 300 mg) Vokanamet ▼ Canagliflozin/metformin tablets (50 mg/850 mg, 50 mg/1000 mg, 150mg/850mg, 150mg/1000mg) Jardiance ▼ Empagliflozin tablets (10 mg and 25 mg) Synjardy ▼ Empagliflozin/metformin tablets (5/850mg, 5/1000mg, 12.5/850mg, 12.5/1000mg) Further information European Medicines Agency announcement February 2016 Letter sent to health professionals in March 2016 Article citation: Drug Safety Update Vol 9 issue 9 April 2016: 1. Updates to this page Published 18 April 2016 Contents Explore the topic Alerts and recalls Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright