PMID=22560842
TITLE=Laxative abuse, eating disorders, and kidney stones: a case report and review of the literature.
YEAR=2012
DOI=10.1053/j.ajkd.2012.02.337
ABSTRACT=Kidney stones are listed among the complications of eating disorders; however, very few cases have been reported. We present an additional case of nephrolithiasis associated with laxative abuse, including detailed results of the patient's urine metabolic profiles, in a patient with idiopathic hypercalciuria. We review the literature and provide an explanation for the paucity of cases of nephrolithiasis associated with these disorders. Despite low urine volumes resulting from extracellular fluid volume depletion and hypocitraturia resulting from hypokalemia, both of which would tend to favor the formation of kidney stones, most patients with eating disorders are likely to be protected from stone formation by the hypocalciuric effect of extracellular fluid volume depletion and increased proximal tubular sodium reabsorption. However, patients with underlying idiopathic hypercalciuria who develop eating disorders may be at increased risk of stone formation in the setting of low urine volume and therefore high supersaturation of calcium oxalate and phosphate.
---
PMID=24065427
TITLE=Investigating hypokalaemia.
YEAR=2013
DOI=10.1136/bmj.f5137
ABSTRACT=
---
PMID=28213045
TITLE=Identification of the Causes for Chronic Hypokalemia: Importance of Urinary Sodium and Chloride Excretion.
YEAR=2017
DOI=10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.01.023
ABSTRACT=Uncovering the correct diagnosis of chronic hypokalemia with potassium (K+) wasting from the kidneys or gut can be fraught with challenges. We identified clinical and laboratory parameters helpful for differentiating the causes of chronic hypokalemia. Normotensive patients referred to our tertiary academic medical center for the evaluation of chronic hypokalemia were prospectively enrolled over 5 years. Clinical features, laboratory examinations-including blood and spot urine electrolytes, acid-base status, biochemistries, and hormones-as well as genetic analysis, were determined. Ninety-nine patients with chronic normotensive hypokalemia (serum K+ 2.8 ± 0.4 mmol/L, duration 4.1 ± 0.9 years) were enrolled. Neuromuscular symptoms were the most common complaints. Although Gitelman syndrome (n = 33), Bartter syndrome (n = 10), and distal renal tubular acidosis (n = 12) were the predominant renal tubular disorders, 44 patients (44%) were diagnosed with anorexia/bulimia nervosa (n = 21), surreptitious use of laxatives (n = 11), or diuretics (n = 12). Patients with gastrointestinal causes and surreptitious diuretics use exhibited a female predominance, lower body mass index, and less K+ supplementation. High urine K+ excretion (transtubular potassium gradient >3, urine K+/Cr >2 mmol/mmol) was universally present in patients with renal tubular disorders, but also found in >50% patients with gastrointestinal causes. Of interest, while urine sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl-) excretions were high and coupled (urine Na+/Cl- ratio ∼1) in renal tubular disorders and "on" diuretics use, skewed or uncoupled urine Na+ and Cl- excretions were found in anorexia/bulimia nervosa and laxatives abuse (urine Na+/Cl- ratio: 5.0 ± 2.2, 0.4 ± 0.2, respectively) and low urine Na+ and Cl- excretions with fixed Na+/Cl- ratios (0.9 ± 0.2) when "off" diuretics. Besides body mass index, sex, and blood acid-base status, integrated interpretation of the urine Na+:Cl- excretion and their ratio is important to make an accurate diagnosis and treatment plan for patients with chronic normotensive hypokalemia.
---
PMID=18562060
TITLE=Acute electrolyte and acid-base disorders in patients with ileostomies: a case series.
YEAR=2008
DOI=10.1053/j.ajkd.2008.04.015
ABSTRACT=Patients with ileostomies are well known to be susceptible to extracellular fluid volume depletion as a result of fluid and solute losses that are greater than intake. However, electrolyte and acid-base disorders accompanying these episodes of volume depletion are not well delineated. Case series. 7 patients with hospitalization because of acute acid-base disturbances at an academic medical center. In all patients, serum and urine creatinine and electrolytes were measured. In 2 patients, arterial blood pH and Pco(2) and ileal drainage electrolytes also were measured. 2 patients presented with severe metabolic alkalosis, and the remaining 5 patients had low serum total carbon dioxide values in association with hyperkalemia. All 7 had acute renal failure. Pathophysiological characteristics, diagnosis, and management of these disorders are discussed, along with considerations for long-term management of fluid and electrolyte balance. This report illustrates electrolyte and acid-base disorders encountered in patients with ileostomies from our clinical experience. We have no data about the incidence of these disorders. Patients with ileostomies can develop diverse and potentially life-threatening acute electrolyte and acid-base disorders when ileostomy drainage increases. Either metabolic acidosis or metabolic alkalosis can occur, depending on the nature and duration of the losses. These cases emphasize the need to be aware of the variety of acute electrolyte and acid-base disorders that can occur in this group of patients and to intervene rapidly when they develop.
---
PMID=11558061
TITLE=Hypokalemic nephropathy after pelvic pouch procedure and protective loop ileostomy.
YEAR=2001
DOI=10.1055/s-2001-16691
ABSTRACT=Proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis and temporary ileostomy has been established as a curative operation in severe ulcerative colitis during the last 2 decades. Electrolyte imbalances during the first postoperative weeks until ileostomy closure have been reported previously. Here we report about a 70-year-old male patient with a 38 year-history of severe ulcerative colitis who developed slowly progressive renal failure after proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis and temporary ileostomy. He was referred to our centre with a serum creatinine of 818 micromol/L, hypokalemia of 2.83 mmol/L and metabolic alkalosis as a patient with suspected end-stage renal disease in order to perform shunt surgery and start chronic hemodialysis. However, hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis are not typical for end-stage renal disease, and renal biopsy showed typical signs of hypokalemic nephropathy. Our patient almost completely recovered after ileostomy closure. This case clearly shows that temporary ileostomy in patients who underwent proctocolectomy, e. g. for ulcerative colitis, is associated with a risk of hypokalemic nephropathy. The appropriate and definite therapy is a surgical one, i. e. ileostomy closure. Monitoring metabolic changes after proctocolectomy and ileostomy, especially during the defunctionalized stage when temporary ileostomy is still present, is essential.
---
PMID=31955390
TITLE=Metabolic alkalosis due to short bowel syndrome in a hemodialysis patient.
YEAR=2020
DOI=10.1007/s13730-020-00445-1
ABSTRACT=A 53-year-old man on hemodialysis suffered from short bowel syndrome after subtotal colectomy and partial resection of the small intestine. Laboratory tests showed multiple electrolyte disorders and enlarged sodium and chloride ion (Cl-) gaps despite treatment with large volume of sodium chloride replacement via central venous infusion. Blood gas analysis showed slightly high bicarbonate ion levels and metabolic alkalosis was suspected, which is uncommon in end stage kidney disease. The measurement of electrolytes in feces from ileostomy showed relatively high Cl- excretion. The loss of Cl- to feces may have caused the metabolic alkalosis; thus, additional Cl- replacement may have been necessary.
---
PMID=25874098
TITLE=Acute pre-renal failure: acquired chloride diarrhea after bowel resection.
YEAR=2012
DOI=10.1093/ckj/sfs082
ABSTRACT=A 58-year old male with a history of small bowel resection and ileostomy presented with severe dehydration and high ostomy output. Laboratory investigation indicated hypochloremia, hypokalemia, hyponatremia, metabolic alkalosis, chloride-rich diarrhea, acute renal failure, and low urinary chloride excretion. Due to striking similarities to congenital chloridorrhea (CCD) reported in neonates, we empirically diagnosed acquired chloridorrhea (ACD, chloride diarrhea). This is a rare disorder resulting in profuse chloride-rich diarrhea and classic metabolic derangements affecting adults with chronic intestinal inflammation, often in association with bowel surgery. In this report, we review the relevant literature and discuss the genetic defects likely contributing to both the congenital and acquired forms of chloridorrhea.
---
