===== EMA forxiga_product_information.txt =====

--- 4.1    Therapeutic indications ---
4.1    Therapeutic indications

Type 2 diabetes mellitus

Forxiga is indicated in adults and children aged 10 years and above for the treatment of insufficiently
controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus as an adjunct to diet and exercise
-     as monotherapy when metformin is considered inappropriate due to intolerance.
-     in addition to other medicinal products for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.

For study results with respect to combination of therapies, effects on glycaemic control, cardiovascular
and renal events, and the populations studied, see sections 4.4, 4.5 and 5.1.

Heart failure

Forxiga is indicated in adults for the treatment of symptomatic chronic heart failure.

                                                    2

Chronic kidney disease

Forxiga is indicated in adults for the treatment of chronic kidney disease.


--- 4.2   Posology and method of administration ---
4.2   Posology and method of administration

Posology

Type 2 diabetes mellitus
The recommended dose is 10 mg dapagliflozin once daily.

When dapagliflozin is used in combination with insulin or an insulin secretagogue, such as a
sulphonylurea, a lower dose of insulin or insulin secretagogue may be considered to reduce the risk of
hypoglycaemia (see sections 4.5 and 4.8).

Heart failure
The recommended dose is 10 mg dapagliflozin once daily.

Chronic kidney disease
The recommended dose is 10 mg dapagliflozin once daily.

Special populations
Renal impairment
No dose adjustment is required based on renal function.

Due to limited experience, it is not recommended to initiate treatment with dapagliflozin in patients
with GFR < 25 mL/min.

In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, the glucose lowering efficacy of dapagliflozin is reduced
when the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is < 45 mL/min and is likely absent in patients with severe
renal impairment. Therefore, if GFR falls below 45 mL/min, additional glucose lowering treatment
should be considered in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus if further glycaemic control is needed
(see sections 4.4, 4.8, 5.1 and 5.2).

Hepatic impairment
No dose adjustment is necessary for patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment. In patients
with severe hepatic impairment, a starting dose of 5 mg is recommended. If well tolerated, the dose
may be increased to 10 mg (see sections 4.4 and 5.2).

Elderly (≥ 65 years)
No dose adjustment is recommended based on age.

Paediatric population
No dose adjustment is required for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus in children aged 10 years
and above (see sections 5.1 and 5.2). No data are available for children below 10 years of age.

The safety and efficacy of dapagliflozin for the treatment of heart failure or for the treatment of
chronic kidney disease in children < 18 years have not yet been established. No data are available.

Method of administration

Forxiga can be taken orally once daily at any time of day with or without food. Tablets are to be
swallowed whole.




                                                   3


--- 4.3   Contraindications ---
4.3   Contraindications

Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1.


--- 4.4   Special warnings and precautions for use ---
4.4   Special warnings and precautions for use

General

Dapagliflozin should not be used in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (see “Diabetic ketoacidosis”
in section 4.4).

Renal impairment

Due to limited experience, it is not recommended to initiate treatment with dapagliflozin in patients
with GFR < 25 mL/min.

The glucose lowering efficacy of dapagliflozin is dependent on renal function, and is reduced in
patients with GFR < 45 mL/min and is likely absent in patients with severe renal impairment (see
sections 4.2, 5.1 and 5.2).

In one study in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate renal impairment
(GFR < 60 mL/min), a higher proportion of patients treated with dapagliflozin had adverse reactions
of increase in creatinine, phosphorus, parathyroid hormone (PTH) and hypotension, compared with
placebo.

Hepatic impairment

There is limited experience in clinical studies in patients with hepatic impairment. Dapagliflozin
exposure is increased in patients with severe hepatic impairment (see sections 4.2 and 5.2).

Use in patients at risk for volume depletion and/or hypotension

Due to its mechanism of action, dapagliflozin increases diuresis which may lead to the modest
decrease in blood pressure observed in clinical studies (see section 5.1). It may be more pronounced in
patients with very high blood glucose concentrations.

Caution should be exercised in patients for whom a dapagliflozin-induced drop in blood pressure
could pose a risk, such as patients on anti-hypertensive therapy with a history of hypotension or
elderly patients.

In case of intercurrent conditions that may lead to volume depletion (e.g. gastrointestinal illness),
careful monitoring of volume status (e.g. physical examination, blood pressure measurements,
laboratory tests including haematocrit and electrolytes) is recommended. Temporary interruption of
treatment with dapagliflozin is recommended for patients who develop volume depletion until the
depletion is corrected (see section 4.8).

Diabetic ketoacidosis

Rare cases of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), including life-threatening and fatal cases, have been
reported in patients treated with sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, including
dapagliflozin. In a number of cases, the presentation of the condition was atypical with only
moderately increased blood glucose values, below 14 mmol/L (250 mg/dL).

The risk of diabetic ketoacidosis must be considered in the event of non-specific symptoms such as
nausea, vomiting, anorexia, abdominal pain, excessive thirst, difficulty breathing, confusion, unusual
fatigue or sleepiness. Patients should be assessed for ketoacidosis immediately if these symptoms
occur, regardless of blood glucose level.

                                                    4

In patients where DKA is suspected or diagnosed, dapagliflozin treatment should be stopped
immediately.

Treatment should be interrupted in patients who are hospitalised for major surgical procedures or acute
serious medical illnesses. Monitoring of ketones is recommended in these patients. Measurement of
blood ketone levels is preferred to urine. Treatment with dapagliflozin may be restarted when the
ketone values are normal and the patient’s condition has stabilised.

Before initiating dapagliflozin, factors in the patient history that may predispose to ketoacidosis should
be considered.

Prolonged ketoacidosis and prolonged glucosuria have been observed with dapagliflozin. Ketoacidosis
may last longer after discontinuation of dapagliflozin than expected from the plasma half-life (see
section 5.2). Dapagliflozin-independent factors, such as insulin deficiency, might be involved in
prolonged periods of ketoacidosis.

Patients who may be at higher risk of DKA include patients with a low beta-cell function reserve (e.g.
type 2 diabetes patients with low C-peptide or latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) or
patients with a history of pancreatitis), patients with conditions that lead to restricted food intake or
severe dehydration, patients for whom insulin doses are reduced and patients with increased insulin
requirements due to acute medical illness, surgery or alcohol abuse. SGLT2 inhibitors should be used
with caution in these patients.

Restarting SGLT2 inhibitor treatment in patients experiencing a DKA while on SGLT2 inhibitor
treatment is not recommended, unless another clear precipitating factor is identified and resolved.

In type 1 diabetes mellitus studies with dapagliflozin, DKA was reported with common frequency.
Dapagliflozin should not be used for treatment of patients with type 1 diabetes.

Necrotising fasciitis of the perineum (Fournier’s gangrene)

Postmarketing cases of necrotising fasciitis of the perineum (also known as Fournier’s gangrene) have
been reported in female and male patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors (see section 4.8). This is a rare but
serious and potentially life-threatening event that requires urgent surgical intervention and antibiotic
treatment.

Patients should be advised to seek medical attention if they experience a combination of symptoms of
pain, tenderness, erythema, or swelling in the genital or perineal area, with fever or malaise. Be aware
that either uro-genital infection or perineal abscess may precede necrotising fasciitis. If Fournier’s
gangrene is suspected, Forxiga should be discontinued and prompt treatment (including antibiotics and
surgical debridement) should be instituted.

Urinary tract infections

Urinary glucose excretion may be associated with an increased risk of urinary tract infection;
therefore, temporary interruption of dapagliflozin should be considered when treating pyelonephritis
or urosepsis.

Elderly (≥ 65 years)

Elderly patients may be at a greater risk for volume depletion and are more likely to be treated with
diuretics.

Elderly patients are more likely to have impaired renal function, and/or to be treated with
anti-hypertensive medicinal products that may cause changes in renal function such as

                                                   5

angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) and angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers (ARB).
The same recommendations for renal function apply to elderly patients as to all patients (see
sections 4.2, 4.4, 4.8 and 5.1).

Cardiac failure

Experience with dapagliflozin in NYHA class IV is limited.

Infiltrative cardiomyopathy

Patients with infiltrative cardiomyopathy have not been studied.

Chronic kidney disease

There is no experience with dapagliflozin for the treatment of chronic kidney disease in patients
without diabetes who do not have albuminuria. Patients with albuminuria may benefit more from
treatment with dapagliflozin.

Increased haematocrit

Increased haematocrit has been observed with dapagliflozin treatment (see section 4.8). Patients with
pronounced elevations in haematocrit should be monitored and investigated for underlying
haematological disease.

Lower limb amputations

An increase in cases of lower limb amputation (primarily of the toe) has been observed in long-term,
clinical studies in type 2 diabetes mellitus with SGLT2 inhibitors. It is unknown whether this
constitutes a class effect. It is important to counsel patients with diabetes on routine preventative foot
care.

Urine laboratory assessments

Due to its mechanism of action, patients taking Forxiga will test positive for glucose in their urine.

Lactose

The tablets contain lactose. Patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, total
lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption should not take this medicinal product.


===== EMA jardiance_product_information.txt =====

--- 4.1    Therapeutic indications ---
4.1    Therapeutic indications

Type 2 diabetes mellitus

Jardiance is indicated in adults and children aged 10 years and above for the treatment of insufficiently
controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus as an adjunct to diet and exercise
-      as monotherapy when metformin is considered inappropriate due to intolerance
-      in addition to other medicinal products for the treatment of diabetes
For study results with respect to combination of therapies, effects on glycaemic control, cardiovascular
and renal events, and the populations studied, see sections 4.4, 4.5 and 5.1.

Heart failure

Jardiance is indicated in adults for the treatment of symptomatic chronic heart failure.


                                                    2

Chronic kidney disease

Jardiance is indicated in adults for the treatment of chronic kidney disease.


--- 4.2   Posology and method of administration ---
4.2   Posology and method of administration

Posology

Type 2 diabetes mellitus
The recommended starting dose is 10 mg empagliflozin once daily for monotherapy and add-on
combination therapy with other medicinal products for the treatment of diabetes. In patients tolerating
empagliflozin 10 mg once daily who have an eGFR ≥ 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and need tighter glycaemic
control, the dose can be increased to 25 mg once daily. The maximum daily dose is 25 mg (see below
and section 4.4).

Heart failure
The recommended dose is 10 mg empagliflozin once daily.

Chronic kidney disease
The recommended dose is 10 mg empagliflozin once daily.

All indications
When empagliflozin is used in combination with a sulphonylurea or with insulin, a lower dose of the
sulphonylurea or insulin may be considered to reduce the risk of hypoglycaemia (see sections 4.5 and
4.8).

If a dose is missed, it should be taken as soon as the patient remembers; however, a double dose
should not be taken on the same day.

Special populations
Renal impairment
Due to limited experience, it is not recommended to initiate treatment with empagliflozin in patients
with an eGFR < 20 mL/min/1.73 m2.

In patients with an eGFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 the daily dose of empagliflozin is 10 mg.

In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, the glucose lowering efficacy of empagliflozin is reduced in
patients with an eGFR < 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 and likely absent in patients with an eGFR
< 30 mL/min/1.73 m2. Therefore, if eGFR falls below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2, additional glucose lowering
treatment should be considered if needed (see sections 4.4, 4.8, 5.1 and 5.2).

Hepatic impairment
No dose adjustment is required for patients with hepatic impairment. Empagliflozin exposure is
increased in patients with severe hepatic impairment. Therapeutic experience in patients with severe
hepatic impairment is limited and therefore not recommended for use in this population (see
section 5.2).

Elderly
No dose adjustment is recommended based on age. In patients 75 years and older, an increased risk for
volume depletion should be taken into account (see sections 4.4 and 4.8).

Paediatric population
The recommended starting dose is 10 mg empagliflozin once daily. In patients tolerating
empagliflozin 10 mg once daily and requiring additional glycaemic control, the dose can be increased
to 25 mg once daily (see sections 5.1 and 5.2). No data are available for children with eGFR
< 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and children below 10 years of age.


                                                    3

The safety and efficacy of empagliflozin for the treatment of heart failure or for the treatment of
chronic kidney disease in children under 18 years of age have not been established. No data are
available.

Method of administration

The tablets can be taken with or without food, swallowed whole with water.


--- 4.3   Contraindications ---
4.3   Contraindications

Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1.


--- 4.4   Special warnings and precautions for use ---
4.4   Special warnings and precautions for use

General

Empagliflozin should not be used in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (see “Ketoacidosis” in
section 4.4).

Ketoacidosis

Cases of ketoacidosis, including life-threatening and fatal cases, have been reported in patients with
diabetes mellitus treated with SGLT2 inhibitors, including empagliflozin. In a number of cases, the
presentation of the condition was atypical with only moderately increased blood glucose values, below
14 mmol/L (250 mg/dL). It is not known if ketoacidosis is more likely to occur with higher doses of
empagliflozin. Although ketoacidosis is less likely to occur in patients without diabetes mellitus, cases
have also been reported in these patients.

The risk of ketoacidosis must be considered in the event of non-specific symptoms such as nausea,
vomiting, anorexia, abdominal pain, excessive thirst, difficulty breathing, confusion, unusual fatigue
or sleepiness. Patients should be assessed for ketoacidosis immediately if these symptoms occur,
regardless of blood glucose level.

In patients where ketoacidosis is suspected or diagnosed, treatment with empagliflozin should be
discontinued immediately.

Treatment should be interrupted in patients who are hospitalised for major surgical procedures or acute
serious medical illnesses. Monitoring of ketones is recommended in these patients. Measurement of
blood ketone levels is preferred to urine. Treatment with empagliflozin may be restarted when the
ketone values are normal and the patient’s condition has stabilised.

Before initiating empagliflozin, factors in the patient history that may predispose to ketoacidosis
should be considered.

Prolonged ketoacidosis and prolonged glucosuria have been observed with
empagliflozin. Ketoacidosis may last longer after discontinuation of empagliflozin than expected from
the plasma half-life (see section 5.2). Empagliflozin-independent factors, such as insulin deficiency,
might be involved in prolonged periods of ketoacidosis.

Patients who may be at higher risk of ketoacidosis include patients with a low beta-cell function
reserve (e.g. type 2 diabetes patients with low C-peptide or latent autoimmune diabetes in adults
(LADA) or patients with a history of pancreatitis), patients with conditions that lead to restricted food
intake or severe dehydration, patients for whom insulin doses are reduced and patients with increased
insulin requirements due to acute medical illness, surgery or alcohol abuse. SGLT2 inhibitors should
be used with caution in these patients.



                                                    4

Restarting SGLT2 inhibitor treatment in patients with previous ketoacidosis while on SGLT2 inhibitor
treatment is not recommended, unless another clear precipitating factor is identified and resolved.

Jardiance should not be used in patients with type 1 diabetes. Data from a clinical trial program in
patients with type 1 diabetes showed increased ketoacidosis occurrence with common frequency in
patients treated with empagliflozin 10 mg and 25 mg as an adjunct to insulin compared to placebo.

Renal impairment

Due to limited experience, it is not recommended to initiate treatment with empagliflozin in patients
with an eGFR < 20 mL/min/1.73 m2.

In patients with an eGFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 the daily dose of empagliflozin is 10 mg (see
section 4.2).

The glucose lowering efficacy of empagliflozin is dependent on renal function, and is reduced in
patients with an eGFR < 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 and is likely absent in patients with an eGFR
< 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 (see section 4.2, 5.1 and 5.2).

Monitoring of renal function
Assessment of renal function is recommended as follows:
-     Prior to empagliflozin initiation and periodically during treatment, i.e. at least yearly (see
      sections 4.2, 4.8, 5.1 and 5.2).
-     Prior to initiation of any concomitant medicinal product that may have a negative impact on
      renal function.

Risk for volume depletion

Based on the mode of action of SGLT2 inhibitors, osmotic diuresis accompanying glucosuria may
lead to a modest decrease in blood pressure (see section 5.1). Therefore, caution should be exercised in
patients for whom an empagliflozin-induced drop in blood pressure could pose a risk, such as patients
with known cardiovascular disease, patients on anti-hypertensive therapy with a history of
hypotension or patients aged 75 years and older.

In case of conditions that may lead to fluid loss (e.g. gastrointestinal illness), careful monitoring of
volume status (e.g. physical examination, blood pressure measurements, laboratory tests including
haematocrit) and electrolytes is recommended for patients receiving empagliflozin. Temporary
interruption of treatment with empagliflozin should be considered until the fluid loss is corrected.

Elderly

The effect of empagliflozin on urinary glucose excretion is associated with osmotic diuresis, which
could affect the hydration status. Patients aged 75 years and older may be at an increased risk of
volume depletion. A higher number of these patients treated with empagliflozin had adverse reactions
related to volume depletion as compared to placebo (see section 4.8). Therefore, special attention
should be given to their volume intake in case of co-administered medicinal products which may lead
to volume depletion (e.g. diuretics, ACE inhibitors).

Complicated urinary tract infections

Cases of complicated urinary tract infections including pyelonephritis and urosepsis have been
reported in patients treated with empagliflozin (see section 4.8). Temporary interruption of
empagliflozin should be considered in patients with complicated urinary tract infections.




                                                     5

Necrotising fasciitis of the perineum (Fournier’s gangrene)

Cases of necrotising fasciitis of the perineum, (also known as Fournier’s gangrene), have been
reported in female and male patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors, including empagliflozin. This is a rare
but serious and potentially life-threatening event that requires urgent surgical intervention and
antibiotic treatment.

Patients should be advised to seek medical attention if they experience a combination of symptoms of
pain, tenderness, erythema, or swelling in the genital or perineal area, with fever or malaise. Be aware
that either uro-genital infection or perineal abscess may precede necrotising fasciitis. If Fournier´s
gangrene is suspected, Jardiance should be discontinued and prompt treatment (including antibiotics
and surgical debridement) should be instituted.

Lower limb amputations

An increase in cases of lower limb amputation (primarily of the toe) has been observed in long-term
clinical studies with another SGLT2 inhibitor. It is unknown whether this constitutes a class effect.
Like for all diabetic patients it is important to counsel patients on routine preventative foot-care.

Hepatic injury

Cases of hepatic injury have been reported with empagliflozin in clinical trials. A causal relationship
between empagliflozin and hepatic injury has not been established.

Elevated haematocrit

Haematocrit increase was observed with empagliflozin treatment (see section 4.8). Patients with
pronounced elevations in haematocrit should be monitored and investigated for underlying
haematological disease.

Chronic kidney disease

Patients with albuminuria may benefit more from treatment with empagliflozin.

Infiltrative disease or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy

Patients with infiltrative disease or with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy have not been specifically studied.
Therefore, efficacy in these patients has not been established.

Urine laboratory assessments

Due to its mechanism of action, patients taking Jardiance will test positive for glucose in their urine.

Interference with 1,5-anhydroglucitol (1,5-AG) assay

Monitoring glycaemic control with 1,5-AG assay is not recommended as measurements of 1,5-AG are
unreliable in assessing glycaemic control in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors. Use of alternative
methods to monitor glycaemic control is advised.

Lactose

The tablets contain lactose. Patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, total
lactase deficiency, or glucose-galactose malabsorption should not take this medicinal product.

Sodium

Each tablet contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg), that is to say essentially ‘sodium free’.

                                                    6
