The Hypokalemia Mystery: Distinguishing Gitelman
and         Bartter         Syndromes             from        ‘Pseudo-Bartter
Syndrome’

Sara S. Jdiaa 1, Stephen B. Walsh 2, Detlef Bockenhauer 2, Sara W. Fakhredine 1, Sahar H.
Koubar 1


1
    Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, American
University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
2
    Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, University College London, London, United
Kingdom.




Corresponding author:
Sahar H. Koubar M.D.
Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine
American University of Beirut Medical Center
Riad El-Solh 1107 2020, Beirut, Lebanon.
Telephone number: +961 81 607 088
E-mail: sk62@aub.edu.lb



Keywords: Gitelman syndrome, Bartter syndrome, Pseudo-Bartter syndrome; Bartter-like
syndrome; hypokalemia, diuretic abuse, laxative abuse, self-induced vomiting


Words count: 948



                                                                                       1
Introduction:
     The Gitelman and Bartter Syndromes (GS and BS, respectively) are characterized by
the constellation of hypokalemia, hypochloremia, metabolic alkalosis, hyper-reninemic
hyperaldosteronism, low to normal blood pressure and juxtaglomerular apparatus
hypertrophy. These are due to pathogenic variants in the genes that encode the thiazide-
sensitive sodium-chloride cotransporter NCC (SLC12A3) in the distal convoluted tubule or
transporters involved in sodium chloride reabsorption in the loop of Henle. ‘Pseudo-Bartter
syndrome’ (PBS) is caused by extra-renal or acquired renal salt losses and shares the same
plasma electrolyte profile and acid-base disturbances, making the distinction from the
genetic forms very challenging. PBS has various etiologies including diuretic and laxative
abuse, self-induced vomiting and the side effects of some antimicrobials. Additionally,
congenital chloride diarrhea, cystic fibrosis, Pendred syndrome and chloride deficient diet
can manifest as PBS (1).
     In this review, we focus on factitious PBS secondary to diuretic abuse, laxative abuse
or self-induced vomiting, whereby we point out some clinical and laboratory clues to help
clinicians make the correct diagnosis.


Patient’s characteristics and clinical features of factitious PBS
     Concealed diuretic abuse, laxative abuse and self-induced vomiting are the most
common causes of PBS in adults. They are typically seen in women preoccupied with their
body image and in patients with psychiatric eating disorders that include purging (2).
Reported motives include slimming, edema, bloating, premenstrual symptoms and
persistent constipation (3).

     The ability of some patients to obscure their abuse or self-induced vomiting can make
the diagnosis of factitious PBS challenging. There are reports of patients who misled their
physicians and agreed to undergo invasive diagnostic procedures like kidney biopsy, renal
arteriography and renal vein catheterization for assessment of differential renin secretion
before a diagnosis of diuretics or laxative abuse was made (4). Interestingly, the severe



                                                                                         2
and even life-threating symptoms associated with hypokalemia and volume contraction
sometimes may not stop these patients from continuing their dangerous purging behavior.
Some of them tend to continue purgative habits despite having weakness, cramps,
dizziness, polyuria and paralysis (5). Therefore, it is important to raise the differential of
factitious PBS in patients with mysterious hypokalemia even if they deny any of the
aforementioned behaviors.


Laboratory data of PBS secondary to diuretic abuse:
      Urine sodium, potassium and chloride are usually high under the effect of recent
diuretic intake and low after remote use. Indeed, the variability in urine sodium, potassium
and chloride values should raise suspicion of PBS. A positive diuretic screen is diagnostic;
however, a negative diuretic screen does not always rule out its abuse as the diuretic intake
may be intermittent. Therefore, repeating the urinary screen is warranted when the
diagnosis of factitious PBS is suspected. A concomitant measurement of the urinary
fractional excretion of chloride (FECl) can help interpret results of a diuretics screen: a
negative screen in a sample with low urine chloride can be due to the absence of recent
diuretic ingestion, while a negative screen associated with a high urine chloride (FECl >
0.5%) favors a diagnosis of BS (3).
      Nephrocalcinosis,    secondary     to   hypercalciuria    and    hypokalemia-induced
hypocitraturia, can be seen in both BS and loop diuretic abuse. However, one
differentiating feature between the two is the variable urinary calcium excretion which
points towards intermittent loop diuretic ingestion rather than BS. The development of
nephrocalcinosis in PBS patients is a sign of long-term intake of large doses of loop
diuretics (6).


Laboratory data of PBS secondary to laxative abuse:
      Patients abusing laxatives develop hypokalemia because of the high content of
potassium in the lower gastrointestinal tract. Urinary potassium is high in these patients as



                                                                                            3
a result of secondary hyperaldosteronism. Urinary sodium and chloride are typically low.
Similar to diuretics, the intermittent intake of laxatives may lead to a negative screen result.
Another diagnostic limitation is the unavailability of screening tests for all types of
laxatives. Hypermagnesemia, when present, may be a clue to the abuse of magnesium-
containing laxatives (7).


Laboratory data of PBS secondary to self-induced vomiting:
     The pathophysiology of hypokalemia in vomiting is considered to be secondary to
renal losses rather than direct gastrointestinal losses. The low potassium content in the
gastric fluid (5 to 10 mEq/L) only contributes to a small proportion of potassium wasting
in vomiting. Increased gastric acid secretion causes high bicarbonate generation with
subsequent increase in the glomerular filtration of the bicarbonate load and its distal tubular
delivery with an obligatory sodium load. This, coupled with hypovolemia-induced
secondary hyperaldosteronism, causes urinary potassium wasting and thus explains the
high urinary potassium in vomiting (8). The metabolic alkalosis in vomiting can be very
severe with serum bicarbonate values exceeding 45 mmol/L.
       While urinary chloride is typically low in self-induced vomiting, urinary sodium
can be low if the event is remote or high if recent. The high urinary sodium seen with recent
vomiting likely reflects metabolic alkalosis and increased NaHCO3 urinary losses. Table 1
summarizes the serum and urine electrolyte differences between the three entities.


Kidney disease risk in PBS:
       PBS secondary to diuretics, laxative abuse and self-induced vomiting is a risk factor
for the development of chronic kidney disease. Deterioration of kidney function was
initially thought to be secondary to chronic hypokalemia and thus is known as hypokalemic
nephropathy. However, recent studies suggest that it may rather be a consequence of
hyperaldosteronism.     Histologically,   this   entity   manifests    as   proximal    tubular
intracytoplasmic vacuolization with chronic interstitial nephritis and fibrosis (9).



                                                                                              4
Conclusion:
       Unexplained hypokalemia should always raise suspicion for aof factitious PBS
even when the patient denies any diuretic or laxative misuse. Paying careful attention to
the clinical and laboratory pieces of evidence when solving the puzzle of mysterious
hypokalemia is crucial for making the correct diagnosis of factitious PBS and instigating
appropriate treatment. Psychiatric evaluation and management are essential for treatment
success and long-term purging cessation.




Disclosures: The authors declared no relevant conflicts of interest.


Acknowledgments: The authors received no financial support.




                                                                                            5
References:
1.      Najafi M, Kordi-Tamandani DM, Behjati F, Sadeghi-Bojd S, Bakey Z, Karimiani EG, et
al. Mimicry and well known genetic friends: molecular diagnosis in an Iranian cohort of
suspected Bartter syndrome and proposition of an algorithm for clinical differential diagnosis.
Orphanet journal of rare diseases. 2019;14(1):41.
2.      Mira M, Stewart PM, Vizzard J, Abraham S. Biochemical abnormalities in anorexia
nervosa and bulimia. Annals of clinical biochemistry. 1987;24 ( Pt 1):29-35.
3.      Reimann D, Gross P. Chronic, diagnosis-resistant hypokalaemia. Nephrology, dialysis,
transplantation : official publication of the European Dialysis and Transplant Association -
European Renal Association. 1999;14(12):2957-61.
4.      Katz FH, Eckert RC, Gebott MD. Hypokalemia caused by surreptitious self-
administration of diuretics. Annals of internal medicine. 1972;76(1):85-90.
5.      Cawley DT, Curtin PT, McCabe JP. Hypokalaemic paralysis secondary to thiazide
diuretic abuse: an unexpected outcome for cauda equina syndrome. Evidence-based spine-care
journal. 2011;2(4):51-3.
6.      Kim YG, Kim B, Kim MK, Chung SJ, Han HJ, Ryu JA, et al. Medullary
nephrocalcinosis associated with long-term furosemide abuse in adults. Nephrology, dialysis,
transplantation : official publication of the European Dialysis and Transplant Association -
European Renal Association. 2001;16(12):2303-9.
7.      Castelbaum AR, Donofrio PD, Walker FO, Troost BT. Laxative abuse causing
hypermagnesemia, quadriparesis, and neuromuscular junction defect. Neurology.
1989;39(5):746-7.
8.      Alexandridis G, Elisaf M. Renal potassium handling in a patient with surreptitious
vomiting. Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation. 2001;16(11):2275-.
9.      Walsh SB, Unwin E, Vargas-Poussou R, Houillier P, Unwin R. Does hypokalaemia cause
nephropathy? An observational study of renal function in patients with Bartter or Gitelman
syndrome. QJM : monthly journal of the Association of Physicians. 2011;104(11):939-44.
10.     Oster JR, Materson BJ, Rogers AI. Laxative abuse syndrome. The American journal of
gastroenterology. 1980;74(5):451-8.




                                                                                             6
           Table 1: Serum and urine laboratory values in Bartter Syndrome and Pseudo-Bartter
           Syndrome secondary to diuretic abuse, laxative abuse and self-induced vomiting *.


                     Serum K            Serum Co2          Urine Na            Urine K            Urine Cl



Bartter              Low                High†              High                High               High
Syndrome

                                                           High under the High under the High under the
                                                           effect      of effect      of effect      of
                                                           diuretics      diuretics      diuretics
Diuretic abuse       Low                High†
                                                           Low       when Low         when Low         when
                                                           diuretic  effect diuretic  effect diuretic  effect
                                                           weans off        weans off        weans off



Laxative abuse       Low                High†             Low                 High               Low

                                                           High in recent
                                                           vomiting
Self-induced         Low                High†              Low in remote High                     Low
Vomiting                                                   vomiting



           *
               The electrolyte and acid-base disturbances are more complex when a combination of these
           entities is present.
           †
               Hypokalemia contributes to metabolic alkalosis through increasing intracellular shift of
           hydrogen ions, enhancing tubular generation and excretion of ammonium and stimulating
           the distal tubule H+-K+-ATPase pump which excretes hydrogen ions in exchange for
           potassium.




                                                                                                          7

    In laxative abuse, hypokalemia may further contribute to metabolic alkalosis by
interfering with intestinal chloride reabsorption and impairing bicarbonate secretion
through the intestinal chloride-bicarbonate exchanger (10).




                                                                                   8
