PMID	18704378
TITLE	A screening method for the simultaneous detection of glucocorticoids, diuretics, stimulants, anti-oestrogens, beta-adrenergic drugs and anabolic steroids in human urine by LC-ESI-MS/MS.
DOI	10.1007/s00216-008-2292-5
ABSTRACT	This paper presents a general screening method, based on liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS), for the simultaneous detection in human urine of 72 xenobiotics (21 diuretics, 16 synthetic glucocorticoids, 17 beta-adrenergic drugs, 10 stimulants, 5 anti-oestrogens and 3 anabolic steroids), excreted free or as glucuro-conjugates in urine. Although the method has been specifically designed and evaluated in view of its potential application to anti-doping analyses, it can also be effective in other areas of analytical toxicology. Sample preparation was based on two liquid/liquid separation steps (performed at alkaline and at acid pH, respectively) of hydrolyzed human urine, and then an assay by LC/MS-MS in positive and negative ionization mode using an electrospray ionization source (ESI) and multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) as the acquisition mode. The overall time needed for an LC run was less than 15 minutes. All compounds showed good reproducibility in terms of both the retention times (CV%<1) and the relative abundances of the diagnostic transitions (CV%<10). The limits of detection (LOD) were in the range of 1-50 ng/mL for glucocorticoids, anti-oestrogens and steroids, and 50-500 ng/mL for diuretics, beta-adrenergic drugs and stimulants, thus satisfying the minimum required performance limits (MRPL) set by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) for the accredited anti-doping laboratories.
---
PMID	19837636
TITLE	Simultaneous extraction and screening of diuretics, beta-blockers, selected stimulants and steroids in human urine by HPLC-MS/MS and UPLC-MS/MS.
DOI	10.1016/j.jchromb.2009.09.036
ABSTRACT	Described herein are two general screening procedures for the simultaneous determination of 49 exogenous compounds (21 diuretics, 19 beta-blockers, eight stimulants and two steroidal drugs) in human urine by high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) and ultra performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS). Urine samples were extracted using a simple and robust solid phase extraction (SPE) method. Samples were injected onto reversed phase HPLC and UPLC columns connected to tandem mass spectrometers capable of scan-to-scan polarity switching. The methods were validated according to the ISO 17025 international standard for the validation of a qualitative method. Sixty urine samples submitted for routine analysis were tested using both methods, the results of which correlated with results obtained from previously validated procedures. Both methods proved to be useful for routine urine analysis; most notably, the use of UPLC-MS/MS demonstrated that samples can be reliably screened with significantly reduced analysis times.
---
PMID	15565223
TITLE	Screening flavonoid metabolites of naringin and narirutin in urine after human consumption of grapefruit juice by LC-MS and LC-MS/MS.
DOI	
ABSTRACT	The main flavonoids in grapefruit juice, naringin and narirutin, were quantified by LC-MS with structural differentiation by LC-MS/MS. After human consumption of grapefruit juice, urine samples were collected for 24 hours and screened for flavonoid metabolites by LC-MS. The metabolite structures (glucuronides, sulfates, and glucuronide sulfates) were then confirmed via their unique fragmentation patterns by LC-MS/MS. To further verify the identity of the common aglycon (naringenin) shared by the metabolites, enzymatic hydrolysis was performed and the resulting products were analyzed. This work demonstrates that LC-MS and LC-MS/MS techniques can be used for fast metabolite screening without extensive sample preparation.
---
PMID	18585128
TITLE	Liquid-phase microextration combined with liquid chromatography-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry for detecting diuretics in urine.
DOI	10.1016/j.talanta.2007.11.058
ABSTRACT	Trace amounts of diuretics were determined in human urine by hollow fiber liquid-phase microextraction (LPME) combined with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) in this study. Chromatography was performed on a C(8) reversed-phase column. A 25 microL n-octanol was used to extract analytes in urine. Extraction was optimized using a pH 2 solution spiked with 0.15 g/mL NaCl for 40 min at 40 degrees C with 1010 rpm stirring. The limits of detection of diuretics in urine were 0.3-6.8 ng/mL, and linearity range was 1-1000 ng/mL. Recoveries of spiked 50 ng/mL diuretics were 97.7-102.5%. The intra-day precision and inter-day precision were 3-18% and 4-21%, respectively. The diuretics concentration profiles in patient urine were also determined. The results of this study reveal the adequacy of LPME-LC-MS/MS method for analyzing diuretics in urine and quantification limits exceed World Anti-Doping Agency requirements.
---
PMID	19560151
TITLE	Qualitative detection of diuretics and acidic metabolites of other doping agents in human urine by high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry: comparison between liquid-liquid extraction and direct injection.
DOI	10.1016/j.chroma.2009.06.003
ABSTRACT	Direct injection of urine has gained interest in the field of analytical toxicology, including doping control analysis. However, implementation of a direct urinalysis method for the LC-MS/MS detection of 34 diuretics and 9 other doping agents yielded several analytical problems, which were not observed using a traditional liquid-liquid extraction. Therefore a comparative study was made between liquid-liquid extraction and direct injection. Comparison of validation results showed that the liquid-liquid extraction at pH 7 allows to analyze samples without major drawbacks regarding matrix effects. Hence, good sensitivity was observed and detection limits ranged between 1 and 250 ng/mL for all compounds. In the direct injection approach shifted retention times were observed for several acidic and basic compounds due to unwanted matrix effects. This shift was reduced by a 25-fold dilution of the urine samples. Besides the improved retention time stability the diluted samples also exhibited lower ion suppression than the undiluted ones. After 25-fold dilution, detection limits ranged between 10 and 250 ng/mL for all compounds. Since these detection limits are at or below the minimum required performance level, imposed by the World Anti-Doping Agency, the method could be applied to routine anti-doping analysis. Samples, previously declared positive, were reanalysed using both the liquid-liquid extraction and direct injection. With both techniques all 26 samples were found to be positive, showing the applicability of direct injection for the analysis of diuretics.
---
PMID	16617036
TITLE	Screening for basic drugs in equine urine using direct-injection differential-gradient LC-LC coupled to hybrid tandem MS/MS.
DOI	
ABSTRACT	A rapid, selective and robust direct-injection LC/hybrid tandem MS method has been developed for simultaneous screening of more than 250 basic drugs in the supernatant of enzyme hydrolysed equine urine. Analytes, trapped using a short HLB extraction column, are refocused and separated on a Sunfire C(18) analytical column using a controlled differential gradient generated by proportional dilution of the first column's eluent with water. Independent data acquisition (IDA) was configured to trigger a sensitive enhanced product ion (EPI) scan when a multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) survey scan signal exceeded the defined criteria. The decision on whether or not to report a sample as a positive result was based upon both the presence of a MRM response within the correct retention time range and a qualitative match between the EPI spectrum obtained and the corresponding reference standard. Ninety seven percent of the drugs targeted by this method met our detection criteria when spiked into urine at 100 ng/ml; 199 were found at 10 ng/ml, 83 at 1 ng/ml and 4 at 0.1 ng/ml.
---
